WHO Standard
aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS
In tHE WEStErn PaCIfIC rEgIOn
Updated and Reprinted 2009




WHO Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
   WHO Standard Acupuncture Point Locations in the Western Pacific Region


   1. Medicine, Traditional. 2. Acupuncture Point Locations


   ISBN 978 92 9061 248 7                (NLM Classification: WB50)
© World Health Organization (2008)


Publications of the World Health Organization enjoy copyright protection in accordance with the provisions of Protocol 2 of the
Universal Copyright Convention. For rights of reproduction or translation of WHO publications, in part or in toto, application should
be made to the Office of Publications, World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland, or to the Regional Office for the Western
Pacific, Manila, Philippines. The World Health Organization welcomes such applications.

The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion
whatsoever on the part of the Secretariat of the World Health Organization concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or
area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.

The mention of specific companies or of certain manufacturers’ products does not imply that they are endorsed or recommended by
the World Health Organization in preference to others of a similar nature that are not mentioned. Errors and ommissions excepted, the
names of proprietary products are distinguished by initial capital letters.

The authors alone are responsible for the views expressed in this publication.
taBLE Of COntEntS


fOrEWOrd                                               v

aCKnOWLEdgEMEntS                                     vii

gEnEraL gUIdELInES fOr aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS     1

WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS              23
     Lung Meridian                                    25
     Large Intestine Meridian                         33
     Stomach Meridian                                 45
     Spleen Meridian                                  69
     Heart Meridian                                   81
     Small Intestine Meridian                         87
     Bladder Meridian                                 99
     Kidney Meridian                                 135
     Pericardium Meridian                            151
     Triple Energizer Meridian                       157
     gallbladder Meridian                            171
     Liver Meridian                                  195
     governor Vessel                                 203
     Conception Vessel                               219

rEfErEnCES                                           233
ANNEX                                                235
fOrEWOrd


Along with herbal medicine, acupuncture has been used for more than 2500 years as one
of the main pillars of traditional medicine in the Western Pacific Region. Accordingly,
the WHO Regional Committee for the Western Pacific adopted resolutions supporting the
proper use of acupuncture and herbal medicine in 1985 and 1987.

With the aim of standardization in the field of acupuncture, the WHO Regional Office for
the Western Pacific organized a Working Group for the Standardization of Acupuncture
nomenclature in 1981 and, after 10 years of effort, a consensus was reached on the
proposed standard international acupuncture nomenclature. In 1991, A Proposed Standard
International Acupuncture Nomenclature was published by WHO Headquarters and
a revised edition of Standard Acupuncture Nomenclature was published by the WHO
Regional Office for the Western Pacific.

It was reported, however, that there was controversy among Member States regarding
approximately one-fourth of regular acupuncture point locations, raising doubts and
uncertainty regarding the efficacy and safety of acupuncture treatment. It is not known
when this disparity in location of acupuncture points first arose but, in recent decades,
there has been a growing international demand for standardization of acupuncture point
locations for education, research and clinical practice. However, since each Member State
has its own initiatives and traditions, international standardization of acupuncture point
locations has proved extremely difficult.

As an initial step in standardizing acupuncture point locations, the WHO Western Pacific
Regional Office convened the first Informal Consultation on the Development of WHO
Standard of acupuncture Point Locations in October 2003. Experts from China, Japan
and the republic of Korea attended that consultation, and 10 further serial meetings were
organized subsequently by the Regional Office. In the beginning, it appeared it would be
almost impossible to harmonize the activities of the various participants. However, with
the passing of time and the development of mutual understanding and trust, the experts
managed to reach a consensus on most of the controversial acupuncture point locations,
one by one. It took three years to achieve a set of internationally unified acupuncture point
locations, an effort that has provided a firm and solid basis in the field of acupuncture.
Recently, modern scientific apparatus, such as functional magnetic resonance imaging
(f-MRI) and positron emission tomography (PET) has been utilized for acupuncture
research. However, that research has not focused on developing standard acupuncture point
locations. Therefore, the experts taking part in the consultations agreed on the development
of principles and methods by combining document analysis, experts’ clinical experiences
and factual measurements. Their efforts and the resulting outcomes will further enhance
scientific research on acupuncture point locations.

I would like to highlight that the experts involved in this project will be remembered, not
just for standardizing acupuncture point locations, but also for building team spirit among
international scholars in the field of traditional medicine.


         							


                Shigeru Omi, MD, Ph.D.
         							Regional Director
aCKnOWLEdgEMEntS


The World Health Organization, Regional Office for the Western Pacific expresses its
appreciation to all those who contributed to the production of this document.

The Regional Office recognizes the experts who supported and attended eleven serial
meetings on developing standard of acupuncture point locations such as Professor
Wang Xuetai, Professor Huang Longxiang, Professor Shuichi KataI, Professor Shoji
SHINOHARA, Professor Kang Sung-keel and Professor Kim Yong-suk.

We also wish to extend our gratitude to the Ministry for Health, Welfare and family affairs,
Republic of Korea for their financial support, to the State Administration of Traditional
Chinese Medicine, China, the Japan Liaison of Oriental Medicine, the World federation
of acupuncture and Moxibustion Societies, the Institute of acupuncture and Moxibustion
of the China academy of Chinese Medical Sciences, the Korean Society for Meridian and
acupoint, and IdO-nO-nIPPOn-SHa with the 2nd Japan acupuncture Point Committee
for their technical supports.
gEnEraL gUIdELInES
fOr aCUPUnCtUrE POInt
LOCatIOnS


PREFACE

Acupuncture has been practised for more than 2500 years in the Western Pacific Region
and has become a global therapeutic method in recent decades. However, it was reported
that acupuncturists differed by up to 25% in the acupuncture points they used, raising
doubts and uncertainty regarding the efficacy and safety of acupuncture treatment, as well
as causing difficulties in the fields of acupuncture research and education. Member States
therefore increasely began to demand standardization in acupuncture point locations.
Responding to this request, the WHO Western Pacific Regional Office initiated a project
to reach consensus on acupuncture point locations and thus convened 11 serial meetings,
resulting in these guidelines.

The standard for acupuncture point names used in the guidelines is based on WHO 90/8579-
atar-8000, A Proposed Standard for International Acupuncture Nomenclature. However,
while standardized measurement systems for length and width generally require adoption
of an international unit system, it is impossible to use any absolute standard value to
determine the location of acupuncture points on the human body due to the vast differences
in peoples’ sizes and heights. Only by using the Equal Proportional Measurement method,
also known as the Proportional Bone (Skeletal) Measurement method, can the proper
location of acupuncture points be established for all population groups and individuals.
this method was adopted by WHO as the standard measuring unit for acupuncture points
at an international conference held in Seoul, republic of Korea, in 1987. this measuring
unit has therefore been adopted in these guidelines for location of acupuncture points.
2   General Guidelines for Acupuncture Point Locations

    I. Scope

    This Standard stipulates the methodology for locating acupuncture points on the surface
    of the human body, as well as the locations of 361 acupuncture points. The Standard is
    applicable for teaching, research, clinical service, publication and academic exchanges
    involving acupuncture.

    II. Terms and definitions

    The following terms and definitions are used in this Standard.

    1. Standard measuring units:

         Proportional bone (skeletal) cun (B-cun)
         This method divides the height of the human body into 75 equal units. Using joints
         on the surface of the body as the primary landmarks, the length and width of every
         body part is measured by such proportions. The specific method is: divide the height
         of the human body into 75 equal units, then estimate the length and width of a certain
         part of the body according to such units. One unit is equal to one cun. For further
         information on the commonly used proportional bone (skeletal) cun of a whole body,
         refer to the related section on page 11.

         Finger cun (F-cun)
         This method is based on the finger cun of the person to be measured for acupuncture
         point locations. For information on the commonly used method of measurement, refer
         to the section on Locating Method by “finger-cun measurement” on page 13.

         Fingerbreadth (F-breadth)
         This method utilizes the width of the distal phalanx of the middle finger. This should
         be distinguished from the middle finger cun. This method is rarely used e.g. for
         locating ST6 and ST40.

    2.    Standard position and terms of direction:

         The standard position and the terms for the orientation of the human body used in
         traditional acupuncture point location are not the same as those used in modern
         anatomy. For example, according to the traditional method, the palmar side of the
         upper limbs, or the flexional side, is called the medial aspect. This medial aspect is
         the distribution area of the acupuncture points of the three Yin hand meridians. The
         dorsal side of the upper limbs, or the extensional side, is called the lateral aspect.
         This lateral aspect is the distribution area of the acupuncture points of the three Yang
         hand meridians. The side of the lower limbs closer to the midline is called the medial
         aspect, which is the distribution area of the acupuncture points of the three Yin foot
         meridians. The side of the lower limbs away from the midline is called the lateral
                                                           WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   3


     aspect. the posterior portion of the lower limbs is called the posterior aspect, and this
     apsect, along with the lateral aspect, is the distribution area of the acupuncture points
     of the three Yang foot meridians. The anterior and posterior median lines of the head,
     face and trunk are the respective distribution areas of the Conception Vessel and the
     governor Vessel. these median lines are the baselines for locating acupuncture points
     on either side of each pair of the two meridians.

     the modern anatomical position is adopted by this Standard to describe acupuncture
     point locations: the body stands upright, eyes look forward, feet together with toes
     pointing forward and upper limbs hanging by the sides with palms facing forward.
     For the location of certain specific points, other positions are recommended, such as
     the knee-chest position (BL35), lying on the side with the thigh flexed (GB30), etc.

     terms of direction (Figures 1 and 2)

        the terms of direction follow standard anatomical terminology.

        •   Medial and lateral: closer to the median sagittal plane is medial; further away
            from the median sagittal plane is lateral. On the forearm, the same concepts
            are replaced with ulnar and radial, and on the legs, with tibial and fibular.
        •   Superior and inferior: closer to the upper (head) extremity of the body is
            superior; closer to the lower (feet) extremity of the body is inferior. Superior
            and inferior may also be used to relate the location of acupuncture points to
            other points or anatomical landmarks. In this case they refer to directly above
            or below on a straight line.
        •   Anterior and posterior: closer to the ventral surface of the human body is
            anterior; closer to the dorsal surface is posterior.
        •   Proximal and distal: closer to the trunk is proximal; further away from the
            trunk is distal.

3.   Landmarks on the body surface for locating acupuncture points:

                                            Head
     Midpoint of the anterior hairline           the midpoint of the anterior hairline
     (Fig 3, 5)
     Midpoint of the posterior hairline          the midpoint of the posterior hairline
     (Fig 4, 5)
     Corner of the forehead (Fig 3, 5)           the lateral corner of the anterior hairline
                                                 on the forehead
     The glabella (Fig 3)                        the midpoint between the eyebrows
4   general guidelines for acupuncture Point Locations


          The auricular apex (Fig 3, 4, 5)                     the highest point of the auricle when the
                                                               ear is folded forwards.
                                                         Upper limbs
          The centre of the axillary fossa (Fig 6)             the centre of the axillary fossa
          The anterior axillary fold (crease)                  the anterior end of the axillary fold
          (Fig 7)
          The posterior axillary fold (Fig 7)                  the posterior end of the axillary fold
          The cubital crease (Fig 7, 8)                        The crease of elbow when it is flexed 90
                                                               degrees.
          The palmar wrist crease (Fig 7, 8)                   the crease on the line connecting the
                                                               distal ends of the styloid processes of the
                                                               ulna and radius when the wrist is flexed.
                                                               When more than one crease is present,
                                                               the most distal is used.
          The dorsal wrist crease (Fig 7)                      the crease on the line connecting the
                                                               distal ends of the styloid processes of
                                                               the ulna and radius when the wrist is
                                                               extended. When more than one crease is
                                                               present, the most distal is used.
          the border between the red and white                 the junction of the palmar and dorsal
          flesh (Fig 9, 14)                                    skin / the junction of the plantar and
                                                               dorsal skin where there is a change in the
                                                               texture and colour.
           the corner at the root of the nail                  the angle formed by the medial / lateral
          (Fig 10)                                             border of the nail and the base of the nail
                                                               bed.
                                                         Lower limbs
          The gluteal fold (Fig 11)                            The fold between the buttock and the
                                                               thigh on the posterior side of lower limbs
          The popliteal crease (Fig 11)                        the crease of the popliteal fossa
          the prominence of the lateral                        the most prominent point of the lateral
          malleolus (Fig 12, 13)                               malleolus
          the prominence of the medial                         the most prominent point of the medial
          malleolus (Fig 12, 13)                               malleolus
                                                           WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   5


4. regions of body

   the regions of human body used in the description of acupuncture point locations are
   based mainly on the latest version of International Anatomical Terminology, issued
   by the Federative Committee on Anatomical Terminology (FCAT) in 1998. Some
   regions in the International Anatomical Terminology are too difficult a fit for location
   of acupuncture points. Here regions of the body are divided into the head, neck, back,
   chest, abdomen, limbs and perineum. the smaller subdivisions of the body are as
   follows:

             Regions                                       Borderline
                                      Line connecting the superior margin of orbit, the
                                      upper border of the zygomatic arch, the upper
              Head                    border of the external ear, the tip of the mastoid
                                      process, the upper border of the neck, and the
 Head                                 external occipital protuberance
                                      Line connecting the superior margin of orbit, the
                                      upper border of the zygomatic arch, the upper
              face
                                      border of the external ear, the tip of the mastoid
                                      process, and the lower border of the mandible
                                      Superior: inferior borderline of the head and face
              anterior region of
                                      Inferior: clavicle
              the neck
                                      Posterior: anterior margin of the trapezius muscle
 Neck                                 Superior: inferior borderline of head

              Posterior region of     Inferior: line across the spinous process of the
              the neck                seventh cervical vertebra (C7) and the acromion

                                      Anterior: anterior margin of the trapezius muscle
6   General Guidelines for Acupuncture Point Locations


                                                         Superior: line across the spinous process of the
                                                         seventh cervical vertebra (C7) and the acromion

                                                         Lateral: vertical line across the end of the
                         Upper back region               posterior axillary fold

                                                         Inferior: curved line across the spinous process
                                                         of the 12th thoracic vertebra (T12) and the end of
                                                         the 12th rib
                                                         The borderline regions, including the scapular
                                                         region, groin region, shoulder girdle, axilla and
                                                         buttock region, cannot be clearly described using
                         Scapular region
                                                         the terms in surface anatomy. It would be better to
                                                         follow the conventional conceptions of those
                                                         regions.
      Back
                                                         Superior: curved line across the spinous process
                                                         of the 12th thoracic vertebra (T12) and the end of
                                                         the 12th rib

                         Lumbar region                   Lateral: vertical line across the end of the
                                                         posterior axillary fold

                                                         Inferior: line across spinous process of the fifth
                                                         lumbar vertebra (L5) and iliac crest
                                                         Superior: line across spinous process of the fifth
                                                         lumbar vertebra (L5) and iliac crest
                         Sacral region
                                                         Lateral: lateral border of the sacrum

                                                         Inferior: coccyx
                                                         Superior: clavicle

                                                         Inferior: curved line across the sternoxyphoid
                         Anterior thoracic               symphisis, rib arch and inferior margin of the 11th
      Chest
                         region                          and 12th ribs

                                                         Lateral: vertical line across the end of anterior
                                                         axillary fold
                                                     WHO STANDARD ACUPUNCTURE POINT LOCATIONS   7



                             Superior: line across the anterior axillary fold and
                             posterior axillary fold

                             Inferior: line connecting the rib arch and the
                             inferior margin of the 11th and 12th ribs
          Lateral thoracic
          region
                             Anterior: vertical line across the end of the
                             anterior axillary fold

                             Posterior: vertical line across the end of the
                             posterior axillary fold
                             Superior: curved line across the sternoxyphoid
                             symphisis, rib arch and inferior margin of the rib

          Upper abdomen      Inferior: transverse line across the umbilicus

                             Lateral: vertical line across the end of the anterior
                             axillary fold
                             Superior: transverse line across the umbilicus

                             Inferior: upper margin of the symphisis pubis
          Lower abdomen
                             Lateral: fold of the groin, vertical line across the
Abdomen                      end of the anterior axillary fold
                             Superior: inferior borderline of the lateral thoracic
                             region

                             Inferior: iliac crest
          Lateral abdomen
                             Anterior: vertical line across the end of the
                             anterior axillary fold

                             Posterior: vertical line across the end of the
                             posterior axillary fold
          Groin region       See the scapular region
8   General Guidelines for Acupuncture Point Locations


                         Shoulder girdle                 See the scapular region
                         Axilla region                   See the scapular region
                                                         Anterior, posterior, medial and lateral aspects of
                         Arm
                                                         the arm
      Upper
      limbs                                              Anterior, posterior, medial and lateral aspects of
                         Elbow
                                                         the elbow
                                                         Anterior, posterior, medial and lateral aspects of
                         Forearm
                                                         the forearm
                         Hand                            Dorsum and palm of the hand
                         Buttock region                  See the scapular region
                                                         Anterior, posterior, medial and lateral aspects of
                         Thigh
                                                         the thigh
                                                         Anterior, posterior, medial and lateral aspects of
                         Knee
                                                         the knee
      Lower
                                                         Anterior, posterior, medial and lateral aspects of
      limbs              Leg
                                                         the leg
                                                         Dorsum and sole of foot, medial and lateral
                         Foot
                                                         aspects of the foot
                         Ankle                           Anterior, medial and lateral aspects of the ankle
                         Toes
      Perineal
                                                         See the scapular region
      region

    Points which are on the borderline belong to the upper region.
    Umbilicus belongs to upper abdomen, gluteal fold belongs to buttock region.

    5. Reference acupuncture points

         The nature and function of a reference acupuncture point are the same as those of an
         anatomical landmark.

         Reference acupuncture points:

         LU5:            On the anterior aspect of the elbow, at the cubital crease, in the depression
         		              lateral to the biceps brachii tendon. (Fig 15)
                                                  WHO STANDARD ACUPUNCTURE POINT LOCATIONS   9


LU9:    On the anterolateral aspect of the wrist, between the radial styloid process
		      and the scaphoid bone, in the depression ulnar to the abductor pollicis
		      longus tendon. (Fig 15)
LI5:    On the posterolateral aspect of the wrist, at the radial side of the dorsal
		      wrist crease, distal to the radial styloid process, in the depression of the
		      anatomical snuffbox. (Fig 16)
LI11:   On the lateral aspect of the elbow, at the midpoint of the line connecting
		      LU5 with the lateral epicondyle of the humerus. (Fig 16)
LI15:   On the shoulder girdle, in the depression between the anterior end of
		      lateral border of the acromion and the greater tubercle of the humerus.
		      (Fig 15)
ST8:    On the head, 0.5 B-cun directly superior to the anterior hairline at the
		      corner of the forehead, 4.5 B-cun lateral to the anterior median line.
		      (Fig 16)
ST30:   In the groin region, at the same level as the superior border of the pubic
		      symphysis, 2 B-cun lateral to the anterior median line, over the femoral
		      artery. (Fig 15)
ST34:   On the anterolateral aspect of the thigh, between the vastus lateralis
		      muscle and the lateral border of the rectus femoris tendon, 2 B-cun
		      superior to the base of the patella. (Fig 15)
ST35:   On the anterior aspect of the knee, in the depression lateral to the patellar
		      ligament. (Fig 15)
ST41:   On the anterior aspect of the ankle, in the depression at the centre of the
		      front surface of the ankle joint, between the tendons of extensor hallucis
		      longus and extensor digitorum longus. (Fig 15)
SP9:    On the tibial aspect of the leg, in the depression between the inferior
		      border of the medial condyle of the tibia and the medial border of the tibia.
		      (Fig 15)
SP12:   In the groin region, at the inguinal crease, lateral to the femoral artery.
		      (Fig 15)
BL60:   On the posterolateral aspect of the ankle, in the depression between the
		      prominence of the lateral malleolus and the calcaneal tendon. (Fig 16)
KI3:    On the posteromedial aspect of the ankle, in the depression between the
		      prominence of the medial malleolus and the calcaneal tendon. (Fig 16)
TE17:   In the anterior region of the neck, posterior to the ear lobe, in the
		      depression anterior to the inferior end of the mastoid process. (Fig 16)
TE20:   On the head, just superior to the auricular apex. (Fig 16)
GB7:    On the head, at the junction of the vertical line of the posterior border of
		      the temple hairline and the horizontal line of the apex of the auricle.
		      (Fig 16)
GB9:    On the head, directly superior to the posterior border of the auricular root,
		      2 B-cun superior to the hairline. (Fig 16)
GB12:   In the anterior region of the neck, in the depression posteroinferior to the
		      mastoid process. (Fig 16)
10   General Guidelines for Acupuncture Point Locations

            GB20:         In the anterior region of the neck, inferior to the occipital bone, in the
            		            depression between the origins of sternocleidomastoid and the trapezius
            		            muscles. (Fig 16)
            GV20:         On the head, 5 B-cun superior to the anterior hairline on the anterior
            		            median line. (Fig 15, 16)

     III.       Principles and methods for locating acupuncture points on the surface of the body

     1. Principles for locating acupuncture points on the surface of the body:

            To locate an acupuncture point, a combined approach using literature analysis,
            clinical practice and actual and proportional measurement is used. In selecting
            literature for analysis, special importance is attached to ancient and modern literature
            about acupuncture point locations that has a ‘national standard’ nature, such as
            Huangdi Mingtang Jing, Zhenjiu Jiayi Jing, Beiji Qianjin Fang and Tongren Shuxue
            Zhenjiu Tujing. When descriptions of acupuncture point locations in ancient literature
            are not clear, the following four principles are used to determine the proper location:

            •   Priority is given to the anatomical landmark method when it does not conform to
                finger-cun measurement.
            •   Full consideration should be given to all relevant information in the original
                literature about the acupuncture point and its location area, sequence and name.
            •   When determining the location of an acupuncture point, it is important to check
                its location in relation to the location of other relevant points.
            •   Relevant acupuncture point charts or models in the original literature should be
                referred to in order to better understand the location of the acupuncture point.

     2. Methods for locating acupuncture points on the surface of the body:

            Three methods are used for locating acupuncture points:

            •   The anatomical landmark method;
            •   The proportional bone (skeletal) measurement method; and
            •   The finger-cun measurement method

            In practice, it is often neccessary to combine all three methods when locating an
            acupuncture point. The methods primarily used are the anatomical landmark and
            proportional bone (skeletal) measurement. The finger-cun measurement can be used
            when it is difficult to locate the acupuncture point with the above two methods.

            The anatomical landmark method:

            This method utilizes anatomical landmarks on the surface of the body to locate
            acupuncture points. Anatomical landmarks may be classified into two types: fixed
                                                      WHO STANDARD ACUPUNCTURE POINT LOCATIONS   11


landmarks and movable landmarks.

Fixed landmarks refer to protuberances or depressions formed by the joints and
muscles; contours of the eyes, ears, nose and mouth; fingernails and toenails; the
nipples; the navel and so on. For example, the location of GB34 is described as
“anterior and distal to the head of the fibula”.

Movable landmarks refer to the gaps, depressions, wrinkles and peaks which appear
along with the movement of joints, muscles, tendons and skin. For example, SI19
is located in the depression formed just anterior to the centre of the tragus when the
mouth is opened slightly.

Locations of commonly used anatomical landmarks on the surface of the body for
locating acupuncture points include:

a) The 2nd rib: the rib at the same level as the sternal angle; it can be palpated
   inferior to the clavicle. (Fig 17)
b) The 4th intercostal space: at the same level as the nipples in males. (Fig 17)
c) The spinous process of the 7th cervical vertebra: the most prominent spinous
   process on the posterior median line of the neck, which moves with the turning of
   the head. (Fig 18)
d) The spinous process of the 3rd thoracic vertebra: the intersection of the posterior
   median line and the line connecting the medial ends of the two spines of the
   scapulae, when the subject stands upright with arms by the sides. (Fig 18)
e) The spinous process of the 7th thoracic vertebra: the intersection of the posterior
   median line and the line connecting the two inferior angles of the scapulae when
   the subject stands upright with arms by the sides. (Fig 18)
f) The spinous process of the 12th thoracic vertebra: on the posterior midline, at the
   same level as the midpoint of the line connecting the inferior angle of the scapula
   with the highest point of the iliac crest when the subject stand upright with arms
   by the sides. (Fig 18)
g) The spinous process of the 4th lumbar vertebra: the intersection of the posterior
   median line and the line connecting the highest points of the two iliac crests.
   (Fig 18)
h) The spinous process of the 2nd sacral vertebra: the intersection of the line
   connecting the inferior borders of the two posterior superior iliac spines and the
   posterior median line. (Fig 18)
i) The sacral hiatus: at the same level as the two sacral cornu superior to the coccyx,
   on the posterior median line. (Fig 18)

The proportional bone (skeletal) measurement method:

The proportional bone (skeletal) measurement method is also used to locate
acupuncture points on the body. This method uses landmarks on the body surface,
12   general guidelines for acupuncture Point Locations

          primarily joints, to measure the length and width of various parts of the body.
          acupuncture point location is based on the measurements of various parts of the
          body from the book Lingshu chapter on Gudu, combined with the proportional
          measurements created by later scholars. (the method is to divide the length between
          two points of particular joints into equal portions. Each portion is equivalent to
          one cun, and ten portions equal one chi). The primary proportional bone (skeletal)
          measurements of the whole body can be seen in the following table.


                    Proportional Bone (Skeletal) Measurements (Figures 19, 20 and 21)

                                  Head and face                             Source
       from the midpoint of the anterior hairline to the mid-    Lingshu
       point of the posterior hairline：12 B-cun
       from the glabella to the midpoint of the anterior         Shenghui Fang
       hairline：3 B-cun
       Between the bilateral corners of the anterior hairline    Zhenjiu Jiayi Jing
       on the forehead：9 B-cun
       Between the bilateral mastoid processes：9 B-cun           Lingshu
                 Chest, abdomen and hypochondrium
       from the suprasternal notch to the midpoint of the        Lingshu
       xiphisternal junction：9 B-cun
       from the midpoint of the xiphisternal synchondrosis       Lingshu
       to the centre of the umbilicus：8 B-cun
       from the centre of the umbilicus to the superior bor-     Zhenjiu Jiayi Jing
       der of the pubic symphysis：5 B-cun
       Between the two nipples：8 B-cun                           Zhenjiu Jiayi Jing
                           Back and lumbar region
       Between the bilateral medial borders of the scapula:      Zhenjiu Jiayi Jing
       6 B-cun
                                    Upper limbs
       from the anterior or posterior axillary fold to the       Zhenjiu Jiayi Jing & Xunjing
       cubital crease：9 B-cun                                    Kaoxue Bian
       from the cubital crease to the wrist crease：12 B-cun      Lingshu
                                                         WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   13



                    Lower limbs
from the superior border of the pubic symphysis to         Lingshu
the base of the patella：18 B-cun
from the apex of the patella (the centre of the            Lingshu
popliteal fossa) to the prominence of the medial
malleolus：15 B-cun

Note: From the inferior border of the medial condyle
of the tibia (SP9) to the prominence of the medial
malleolus is 13 B-cun. from the inferior border of the
medial condyle of the tibia to the apex of the patella
is converted into 2 B-cun.
from the lateral prominence of the greater trochanter      Lingshu
to the popliteal crease: 19 B-cun
from the gluteal fold to the popliteal crease：14 B-        Tongren Shuxue Zhenjiu
cun                                                        Tujing
from the popliteal crease to the prominence of the         Lingshu
lateral malleolus：16 B-cun
from the prominence of medial malleolus to the             Lingshu
sole：3 B-cun

  The finger-cun measurement method:

  The finger-cun measurement method refers to the proportional measurement method
  for locating acupuncture points based on the size of the fingers of the person to
  be mearsured. this method is mainly used on the lower limbs. When locating
  an acupuncture point, the practitioner, in addition to using the proportional bone
  (skeletal) measurement method, may use the finger-cun measurement of the patient
  being measured in order to verify the standard location of the acupuncture point.

  Middle-finger cun: The distance between the ends of the two radial creases of the
  interphalangeal joints of the middle finger is taken as 1 F-cun when the thumb and the
  middle finger are flexed to form a circle. (Fig 22)

  Thumb measurement: the width of the interphalangeal joint of the thumb is taken as 1
  F-cun. (Fig 23)

  Finger width measurement: when the index, middle, ring and little fingers of the
  subject are extended and closed together, the width of the four fingers on the dorsal
14   General Guidelines for Acupuncture Point Locations

          crease of the proximal interphalangeal joint of the middle finger is taken as 3 F-cun.
          (Fig 24)

     IV.	Description of acupuncture point locations

          In acupuncture point location, a vertical and horizontal coordinate method is adopted
          as much as possible. Using two intersecting lines to make a crossing point, first, the
          distance on the y-coordinate (Y axis) is determined to draw the horizontal line on the
          body, then the distance on the x-coordinate (X axis) is determined to draw the vertical
          line on the body. The latest edition of International Anatomical Terminology is
          utilized to describe the relevant anatomical parts of acupuncture point locations.

          The description for acupuncture point locations does not include methods for
          locating the acupuncture points. Notes will be added, when required, to explain the
          specific body postures that are required to locate certain acupuncture points, as well
          as the techniques for locating body surface landmarks, proportional bone (skeletal)
          measurements, and the relationship with adjacent acupuncture points.

          The focus of explanations for location of acupuncture points is on general body
          positions. Only those special body positions required for certain acupuncture points
          have specific notes under relevant items to explain their locations.

          Notes offer supplementary explanations on the following related key points for
          location of acupuncture points.

          •    A special body position required for acupuncture point location.
          •    The proportional bone (skeletal) measurement.
          •    Explanations of the method of locating certain anatomical landmarks.
          •    The relationship with adjacent acupuncture points or landmark acupuncture points.
          •    Explanations of the differences in surface landmarks between different genders
               and individuals.

     V. Controversial acupuncture point locations

          Through several meetings with Member States organized by the WHO Regional
          Office for the Western Pacific to review the 92 controversial acupuncture point
          locations, 86 were standardized. However, the experts could only make a tentative
          decision on the six remaining points. It was agreed that further scientific research,
          such as multi-centred clinical trials, should be conducted on the six remaining
          controversial acupuncture point locations.

          The six controversial acupuncture points are LI19, LI20, PC8, PC9, GB30 and GV26.
          Their alternative acupuncture point locations are described under “Remarks” in this
          document.
        WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   15




Fig 1           Fig 2
16   general guidelines for acupuncture Point Locations




         Fig 3                                            Fig 5




         Fig 4                                            Fig 6
                WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   17




Fig 7   Fig 9




Fig 8   Fig 10
18   general guidelines for acupuncture Point Locations




         Fig 11                                           Fig 13




         Fig 12                                           Fig 14
              WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   19




Fig 15   Fig 16
20   general guidelines for acupuncture Point Locations




         Fig 17                                           Fig 19




         Fig 18                                           Fig 20
              WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   21




Fig 21   Fig 23




Fig 22   Fig 24
WHO Standard
aCUPUnCtUrE POInt
LOCatIOnS
                WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   25


LUng MErIdIan
手太陰(阴)肺經(经,経)
26   Lung Meridian

     LU1: Zhongfu 中府

     On the anterior thoracic region, at the same
     level as the first intercostal space, lateral to
     the infraclavicular fossa, 6 B-cun lateral to
     the anterior median line.

     Note 1: After locating LU2, LU1 is located
     1 B-cun inferior to LU2.

     Note 2: ST14, KI26, CV20 and LU1 are
     located on the transverse line along the first        infraclavicular
     intercostal space.                                    fossa




                                                                              LU1
     LU2: Yunmen 雲(云)門(门)

     On the anterior thoracic region, in the de-
     pression of the infraclavicular fossa, medial      coracoid process
     to the coracoid process of the scapula, 6          of the scapula
     B-cun lateral to the anterior median line.

     Note 1: After identifying the deltopectoral
     triangle when the arm is flexed and slightly
     abducted against resistance, LU2 is in the
     centre of the deltopectoral triangle.
                                                            infraclavicular
                                                            fossa
     Note 2: ST13, KI27, CV21 and LU2 are
     located on the transverse line along the
     inferior border of the clavicle.




                                                                              LU2
                                                       WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   27


LU3: Tianfu 天府

On the anterolateral aspect of the arm, just
lateral to the border of the biceps brachii
muscle, 3 B-cun inferior to the anterior
axillary fold.

Note: Longitudinally, LU3 is located at the
same level as the junction of the upper one                                 anterior axillary
third and lower two thirds of the line con-                                 fold
necting the level with anterior axillary fold
to LU5.


                                                                          biceps brachii
                                                                          muscle




                                                                    LU3
LU4: Xiabai 俠(侠)白

On the anterolateral aspect of the arm, just
lateral to the border of the biceps brachii
muscle, 4 B-cun inferior to the anterior
axillary fold.

                                                anterior axillary
                                                fossa




                                                                           biceps brachii
                                                                           muscle




                                                                    LU4
28   Lung Meridian

     LU5: Chize 尺澤(泽,沢)

     On the anterior aspect of the elbow, at the
     cubital crease, in the depression lateral to
     the biceps brachii tendon.
                                                    cubital crease
     Note: With the elbow flexed, LU5 is lo-
     cated at the cubital crease, between LI11
                                                                            biceps brachii
     and PC3, separated from PC3 by the biceps                              tendon
     brachii tendon.




                                                                     LU5
     LU6: Kongzui 孔最

     On the anterolateral aspect of the forearm,
     on the line connecting LU5 with LU9, 7 B-
     cun superior to the palmar wrist crease.

     Note: LU6 is 5 B-cun inferior to LU5, 1
     B-cun superior to the midpoint of the line
     connecting LU5 with LU9.




                                                                           palmar wrist
                                                                           crease




                                                                     LU6
                                                         WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS    29


LU7: Lieque 列缺

On the radial aspect of the forearm, be-
tween the tendons of the abductor pollicis
longus and the extensor pollicis brevis
muscles, in the groove for the abductor pol-
licis longus tendon, 1.5 B-cun superior to
the palmar wrist crease.




                                                   palmar
                                                   wrist crease




                                                 tendon of the
                                                 abductor pollicis
                                                 longus muscle               tendon of the
                                                                             extensor pollicis
                                                                             brevis muscle
                                                                       LU7
LU8: Jingqu 經(经,経)渠

On the anterolateral aspect of the forearm,
between the radial styloid process and the
radial artery, 1 B-cun superior to the pal-
mar wrist crease.

Note: 1 B-cun superior to LU9.



                                                                                     radial artery
                                                                                   palmar wrist
                                                                                   crease




                                                             radial artery
                                               radial styloid
                                               process
                                                                       LU8
30   Lung Meridian

     LU9: Taiyuan 太淵(渊)

     On the anterolateral aspect of the wrist,
     between the radial styloid process and the                                  radial artery
     scaphoid bone, in the depression ulnar to
     the abductor pollicis longus tendon.                radial styloid
                                                         process                           palmar
     Note: On the radial side of the palmar wrist   abductor pollicis                      wrist
                                                                                           crease
                                                    longus tendon
     crease, over the radial artery.
                                                                                         scaphoid
                                                                                         bone




                                                                          LU9
     LU10: Yuji 魚(鱼)際(际)

     On the palm, radial to the midpoint of the
     first metacarpal bone, at the border between
     the red and white flesh.




                                                           border
                                                           between
                                                           red and
                                                           white
                                                           flesh
                                                                                        first
                                                                                        metacarpal
                                                                                        bone




                                                                          LU10
                                                WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   31


LU11: Shaoshang 少商

On the thumb, radial to the distal phalanx,
0.1 f-cun proximal-lateral to the radial
corner of the thumb nail, at the intersection
of the vertical line of the radial border and
the horizontal line of the base of the thumb
nail.




                                                         LU11
                           WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   33


LargE IntEStInE MErIdIan
手陽(阳)明大腸(肠)經(经,経)
34   Large Intestine Meridian

     LI1: Shangyang 商陽(阳)

     On the index finger, radial to the distal
     phalanx, 0.1 f-cun proximal-lateral to the
     radial corner of the index fingernail, at the
     intersection of the vertical line of the radial
     border of the fingernail and the horizontal
     line of the base of the index fingernail.




                                                       LI1
     LI2: Erjian 二間(间)

     On the index finger, in the depression distal
     to the radial side of the second metacarpo-
     phalangeal joint, at the border between the
     red and white flesh.

                                                             border between
                                                             red and white flesh

                                                              metacarpo-
                                                              phalangeal
                                                              joint




                                                       LI2
                                            WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   35


LI3: Sanjian 三間(间)

On the dorsum of the hand, in the depres-
sion radial and proximal to the second
metacarpophalangeal joint.




                                                       LI3
LI4: Hegu 合谷

On the dorsum of the hand, radial to the
midpoint of the second metacarpal bone.




                                                                   second
                                                                   metacarpal
                                                                   bone




                                                       LI4
36   Large Intestine Meridian

     LI5: Yangxi 陽(阳)谿(溪)

     On the posterolateral aspect of the wrist,
     at the radial side of the dorsal wrist crease,
     distal to the radial styloid process, in the
     depression of the anatomical snuffbox.

     Note : The depression of the anatomical
     snuffbox is formed when the thumb is fully
     abducted and extended between the ten-
     dons of the extensor pollicis longus and the
     extensor pollicis brevis.



                                                                                      dorsal wrist crease
                                                       anatomical                     radial styloid
                                                       snuffbox                       process
                                                                                  extensor pollicis
                                                      extensor pollicis           longus tendon
                                                      brevis tendon


                                                                            LI5
     LI6: Pianli 偏歷(历)

     On the posterolateral aspect of the forearm,
     on the line connecting LI5 with LI11, 3 B-
     cun superior to the dorsal wrist crease.

     Note: LI6 is located at the junction of
     the upper three fourths and the lower one
     fourth of the line connecting LI5 with LI11.




                                                      dorsal wrist crease




                                                                            LI6
                                                      WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   37


LI 7: Wenliu 溫(温)溜

On the posterolateral aspect of the forearm,
on the line connecting LI5 with LI11, 5 B-
cun superior to the dorsal wrist crease.




                                               dorsal wrist crease




                                                                     LI7
LI8: Xialian 下廉

On the posterolateral aspect of the forearm,
on the line connecting LI5 with LI11, 4 B-
cun inferior to the cubital crease.
                                                                           cubital crease
Note: LI8 is located at the junction of the
upper one third and lower two thirds of the
line connecting LI5 with LI11, 1 B-cun
inferior to LI9.




                                                                     LI8
38   Large Intestine Meridian

     LI9: Shanglian 上廉

     On the posterolateral aspect of the forearm,
     on the line connecting LI5 with LI11, 3 B-
     cun inferior to the cubital crease.
                                                           cubital crease




                                                    LI9
     LI10: Shousanli 手三里

     On the posterolateral aspect of the forearm,
     on the line connecting LI5 with LI11, 2 B-
     cun inferior to the cubital crease.
                                                           cubital crease




                                                    LI10
                                                      WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS    39


LI11: Quchi 曲池

On the lateral aspect of the elbow, at the
midpoint of the line connecting LU5 with
the lateral epicondyle of the humerus.
                                                               cubital crease
Note: When the elbow is fully flexed, LI11
is located in the depression on the lateral
end of the cubital crease.
                                               lateral epicondyle
                                               of the humerus




                                                                           cubital crease


                                                      lateral epicondyle
                                                      of the humerus



                                                                    LI11
LI12: Zhouliao 肘髎(髎)

On the posterolateral aspect of the elbow,
superior to the lateral epicondyle of the
humerus, anterior to the lateral supraepi-
condylar ridge.




                                                                                     lateral
                                              lateral                                suprae-
                                              epicondyle                             picondylar
                                              of the                                 ridge
                                              humerus




                                                                    LI12
40   Large Intestine Meridian

     LI13: Shouwuli 手五里

     On the lateral aspect of the arm, on the line
     connecting LI11 with LI15, 3 B-cun supe-
     rior to the cubital crease.




                                                            cubital
                                                            crease



                                                     LI13
     LI14: Binao 臂臑

     On the lateral aspect of the arm, just ante-
     rior to the border of the deltoid muscle, 7
     B-cun superior to LI11.

                                                            deltoid
                                                            muscle




                                                     LI14
                                                      WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   41


LI15: Jianyu 肩髃(髃)

On the shoulder girdle, in the depression
between the anterior end of lateral border
of the acromion and the greater tubercle of
the humerus.

Note: When the arm is abducted, two de-
pressions appear, anterior and posterior to
the acromion. LI15 is located in the deeper
depression anterior to the acromion. tE14
is located in the posterior depression.        greater
                                               tubercle of
                                               humerus




                                                                                     humerus

                                                       acromion


                                                                   LI15
LI16: Jugu 巨骨(骨)

On the shoulder girdle, in the depression
between the acromial end of the clavicle
and the spine of the scapula.

Note: In the depression between the two
bones lateral to the suprascapular fossa.


                                                        clavicle




                                                                   acromion
                                              suprascapular
                                              fossa           spine of the scapula



                                                                   LI16
42   Large Intestine Meridian

     LI17: Tianding 天鼎

     On the anterior aspect of the neck, at the
     same level as the cricoid cartilage, just
     posterior to the border of the sternocleido-
     mastoid muscle.

     Note: Directly inferior to LI18, at the same
     level as St10.



                                                            cricoid cartilage

                                                           sternocleidomastoid
                                                           muscle




                                                    LI17
     LI18: Futu 扶突

     On the anterior aspect of the neck, at the
     same level as the superior border of the
     thyroid cartilage, between the anterior and
     posterior borders of the sternocleidomas-
     toid muscle.




                                                            thyroid cartilage


                                                           sternocleidomastoid
                                                           muscle




                                                    LI18
                                                  WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   43


LI19: Kouheliao 口禾髎(髎)

On the face, at the same level as the mid-
point of the philtrum, inferior to the lateral
margin of the nostril.

Note: 0.5 B-cun laterals to GV 26.

Remarks: Alternative location for LI19 -
On the face, at the same level as the junc-                                    nostril
tion of the upper one third and lower two                           philtrum
thirds of the philtrum, inferior to the lateral
margin of the nostril.




                                                            LI19
LI20: Yingxiang 迎(迎)香

On the face, in the nasolabial sulcus, at the
same level as the midpoint of lateral border
of the ala of the nose.

Remarks: Alternative location for LI20 -
                                                                      ala of the nose
On the face, in the nasolabial sulcus, at the
level of the inferior border of the ala of the
nose.



                                                                               nasolabial
                                                                               sulcus




                                                            LI20
                   WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   45


StOMaCH MErIdIan
足陽(阳)明胃經(经,経)
46   Stomach Meridian

     ST1: Chengqi 承泣

     On the face, between the eyeball and the
     infraorbital margin, directly inferior to the
     pupil.




                                                      eyeball




                                                        pupil

                                                     infraorbital
                                                     margin




                                                                          ST1
     ST2: Sibai 四白

     On the face, in the infraorbital foramen.




                                                                    infraorbital foramen



                                                                          ST2
                                                               WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   47


ST3: Juliao 巨髎(髎)

On the face, directly inferior to the pupil, at
the same level as the inferior border of the
ala of the nose.

Note: When looking straight ahead, ST3
is located at the intersection of the vertical
line of the pupil and the horizontal line of
the inferior border of the ala of the nose.

                                                     pupil
                                                  ala of the
                                                  nose




                                                                         ST3
ST4: Dicang 地倉(仓)

On the face, 0.4 f-cun lateral to the angle
of the mouth.

Note: Lateral to the angle of the mouth,
the point is located in the nasolabial sulcus
or on the continuation of the nasolabial
sulcus.




                                                  nasolabial
                                                  sulcus




                                                     angle of the
                                                     mouth



                                                                         ST4
48   Stomach Meridian

     ST5: Daying 大迎(迎)

     On the face, anterior to the angle of the
     mandible, in the depression anterior to the
     masseter attachment, over the facial artery.




                                                                            masseter
                                                     angle of the           facial
                                                     mandible               artery




                                                                      ST5
     ST6: Jiache 頰(颊)車(车)

     On the face, one fingerbreadth (middle
     finger) anterosuperior to the angle of the
     mandible.

     Note: On the bisector of the angle of the
     mandible. When the mouth is closed and
     the teeth are clenched, this point is located
     at the prominence of the masseter and in                               masseter
     the depression felt when the clenched teeth     angle of the
                                                     mandible
     are released.
                                                      one fingerbreadth
                                                      (middle finger)




                                                                      ST6
                                                         WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   49


ST7: Xiaguan 下關(关,関)

On the face, in the depression between the
midpoint of the inferior border of the zygo-
matic arch and the mandibular notch.

Note: When the mouth is closed, ST7 is
located at the depression inferior to the
zygomatic arch, directly inferior to gB3.




                                                zygomatic arch


                                                                              mandibular notch




                                                                   ST7
ST8: Touwei 頭(头)維(维)

On the head, 0.5 B-cun directly superior
to the anterior hairline at the corner of the
forehead, 4.5 B-cun lateral to the anterior
median line.
                                                                                   anterior
                                                                                   hairline




                                                                   ST8
50   Stomach Meridian

     ST9: Renying 人迎(迎)

     In the anterior region of the neck, at the
     same level as the superior border of the
                                                     sternocleido-
     thyroid cartilage, anterior to the sterno-      mastoid
     cleidomastoid muscle, over the common           muscle
     carotid artery.                                   carotid artery


     Note 1: The sternocleidomastoid muscle is
     more distinct when the head is turned to the                                thyroid cartilage
     opposite side against resistance.

     Note 2: ST9 is located at the same level as
     LI18, SI16 and the superior border of the
     thyroid cartilage. St9 is located anterior to
                                                                                         thyroid
     the sternocleidomastoid muscle, and SI16,                                           cartilage
     posterior to the sternocleidomastoid muscle
     and LI18, between the anterior and pos-
     terior borders of the sternocleidomastoid                                 sternocleidomastoid
     muscle.                                                                   muscle

                                                                        ST9
     ST10: Shuitu 水突

     In the anterior region of the neck, at the
     same level as the cricoid cartilage, just
     anterior to the border of the sternocleido-
     mastoid muscle.


                                                     sternocleido-
                                                     mastoid
                                                     muscle
                                                                                   cricoid cartilage




                                                                        ST10
                                                           WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   51


ST11: Qishe 氣(气,気)舍(舎)

In the anterior region of the neck, in the
lesser supraclavicular fossa, superior to the
sternal end of the clavicle, in the depres-
sion between the sternal and clavicular
heads of the sternocleidomastoid muscle.
                                                clavicular                            sternal
Note 1: The sternocleidomastoid muscle is       heads of the                          heads of the
more distinct when the head is turned to the    sternocleido-
                                                mastoid
                                                                                      sternocleido-
                                                                                      mastoid
opposite side against resistance.               muscle                                muscle


Note 2: ST11 is located superior to the
clavicle, inferior to St9.

                                                                           lesser supraclavicular
                                                                           fossa




                                                                    ST11
ST12: Quepen 缺盆

In the anterior region of the neck, in the
greater supraclavicular fossa, 4 B-cun
lateral to the anterior median line, in the
depression superior to the clavicle.




                                                       clavicle      greater
                                                                     supraclavicular fossa




                                                                    ST12
52   Stomach Meridian

     ST13: Qihu 氣(气,気)戶

     In the anterior thoracic region, inferior to
     the clavicle, 4 B-cun lateral to the anterior
     median line.


                                                            clavicle




                                                     ST13
     ST14: Kufang 庫(库)房

     In the anterior thoracic region, in the first
     intercostal space, 4 B-cun lateral to the
     anterior median line.




                                                     ST14
                                                WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   53


ST15: Wuyi 屋翳

In the anterior thoracic region, in the sec-
ond intercostal space, 4 B-cun lateral to the
anterior median line.

Note: The second intercostal space is in-
                                                                      sternal angle
ferior to the second rib which is located at
the same level as the sternal angle.




                                                         ST15
ST16: Yingchuang 膺窗(窓)

In the anterior thoracic region, in the third
intercostal space, 4 B-cun lateral to the
anterior median line.




                                                         ST16
54   Stomach Meridian

     ST17: Ruzhong       (乳)中

     In the anterior thoracic region, at the centre
     of the nipple.

     Note: In males, the centre of the nipple is
     located in the fourth intercostal space.




                                                      ST17
     ST18: Rugen        (乳)根

     In the anterior thoracic region, in the fifth
     intercostal space, 4 B-cun lateral to the
     anterior median line.

     Note: In males, ST18 is located at the
     intersection of nipple line and the fifth in-
     tercostal space. In females, St18 is located
     at the midpoint of the inferior crease of the
     breast.




                                                      ST18
                                                 WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   55


ST19: Burong 不容

On the upper abdomen, 6 B-cun superior to
the centre of the umbilicus, 2 B-cun lateral
to the anterior median line.

Note 1: ST 19 is 2 B-cun lateral to CV14.

Note 2: If the infrasternal angle is too sharp
and the rib is located inferior to St19,
St19 can be reached by oblique needling.




                                                          ST19
ST20: Chengman 承滿(满,満)

On the upper abdomen, 5 B-cun superior to
the centre of the umbilicus, 2 B-cun lateral
to the anterior median line.

Note: ST20 is 5 B-cun superior to ST25, 1
B-cun inferior to St19, 2 B-cun lateral to
CV13.




                                                          ST20
56   Stomach Meridian

     ST21: Liangmen 梁門(门)

     On the upper abdomen, 4 B-cun superior to
     the centre of the umbilicus, 2 B-cun lateral
     to the anterior median line.

     Note: ST21 is 4 B-cun superior to ST25, 1
     B-cun inferior to St20, 2 B-cun lateral to
     CV12.




                                                    ST21
     ST22: Guanmen 關(关,関)門(门)

     On the upper abdomen, 3 B-cun superior to
     the centre of the umbilicus, 2 B-cun lateral
     to the anterior median line.

     Note: ST22 is located at the same level and
     lateral to KI18 and CV11.




                                                    ST22
                                               WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   57


ST23: Taiyi 太乙

On the upper abdomen, 2 B-cun superior to
the centre of the umbilicus, 2 B-cun lateral
to the anterior median line.

Note: ST23 is located at the same level and
lateral to KI17 and CV10.




                                                        ST23
ST24: Huaroumen 滑(滑)肉門(门)

On the upper abdomen, 1 B-cun superior to
the centre of the umbilicus, 2 B-cun lateral
to the anterior median line.

Note: ST24 is at the same level and lateral
to CV9.




                                                        ST24
58   Stomach Meridian

     ST25: Tianshu 天樞(枢)

     On the upper abdomen, 2 B-cun lateral to
     the centre of the umbilicus.




                                                    ST25
     ST26: Wailing 外陵

     On the lower abdomen, 1 B-cun inferior to
     the centre of the umbilicus, 2 B-cun lateral
     to the anterior median line.

     Note: ST26 is at the same level and lateral
     to KI15 and CV7.




                                                    ST26
                                               WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   59


ST27: Daju 大巨

On the lower abdomen, 2 B-cun inferior to
the centre of the umbilicus, 2 B-cun lateral
to the anterior median line.

Note: ST27 is at the same level and lateral
to KI14 and CV5.




                                                        ST27
ST28: Shuidao 水道(道)

On the lower abdomen, 3 B-cun inferior to
the centre of the umbilicus, 2 B-cun lateral
to the anterior median line.

Note: ST28 is 3 B-cun inferior to ST25, 1
B-cun inferior to St27, 2 B-cun lateral to
CV4.




                                                        ST28
60   Stomach Meridian

     ST29: Guilai 歸(归,帰)來(来)

     On the lower abdomen, 4 B-cun inferior to
     the centre of the umbilicus, 2 B-cun lateral
     to the anterior median line.

     Note: ST29 is 4 B-cun inferior to ST25, 1
     B-cun inferior to St28, 2 B-cun lateral to
     CV3.




                                                               ST29
     ST30: Qichong 氣(气,気)衝(冲)

     In the groin region, at the same level as the
     superior border of the pubic symphysis, 2
     B-cun lateral to the anterior median line,
     over the femoral artery.

     Note: ST30 is 5 B-cun inferior to ST25, 2
     B-cun lateral to CV2.




                                                     femoral
                                                     artery
                                                                  pubic
                                                                  symphysis




                                                               ST30
                                                             WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   61


ST31: Biguan 髀(髀)關(关,関)

On the anterior aspect of the thigh, in the
depression among three muscles: the proxi-
mal portion of the rectus femoris muscle,
the sartorius muscle and the tensor fasciae      anterior superior
                                                 iliac spine
latae muscle.                                                                        pubic
                                                 tensor fasciae                      symphysis
                                                 latae muscle
Note 1: With the hip and the knee in slight
flexion, and the thigh slightly abducted
when resistance is placed against the an-                                         rectus femoris
teromedial aspect of the thigh, a triangular                                      muscle
depression appears. the proximal portion                                          sartorius muscle
of the rectus femoris muscle is found in the
depression between the sartorius muscle
medially and the tensor fascia latae muscle
laterally. St31 is located at the deepest
point in the depression inferior to the apex                                      lateral end of the
                                                                                  base of the patella
of this triangle.

Note 2: ST31 is located at the intersection                           ST31
of the line connecting the lateral end of the
base of the patella with the anterior superi-
or iliac spine, and the horizontal line of the
inferior border of the pubic symphysis.
62   Stomach Meridian

     ST32: Futu 伏兎(兔)

     On the anterolateral aspect of the thigh, on
     the line connecting the lateral end of the
     base of the patella with the anterior superi-
     or iliac spine, 6 B-cun superior to the base     anterior superior
                                                      iliac spine
     of the patella.




                                                                  patella




                                                                            ST32
     ST33: Yinshi 陰(阴)市

     On the anterolateral aspect of the thigh, lat-
     eral to the rectus femoris tendon, 3 B-cun
     superior to the base of the patella.

     Note: ST33 is at the midpoint of the line
     connecting St32 with the lateral end of the
     base of the patella.

                                                      rectus femoris
                                                      tendon




                                                                                   base of the
                                                                                   patella



                                                                            ST33
                                                           WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   63


ST34: Liangqiu 梁丘

On the anterolateral aspect of the thigh,
between the vastus lateralis muscle and the
lateral border of the rectus femoris tendon,
2 B-cun superior to the base of the patella.

Note: Putting the thigh muscle under ten-
sion, the rectus femoris tendon and the
vastus lateralis muscle are more distinct.
St34 is located between the muscle and the
tendon, 1 B-cun directly inferior to St33.
                                                 vastus lateralis
                                                 muscle


                                                    rectus
                                                    femoris tendon
                                               base of the patella
                                                             patella




                                                                       ST34
ST35: Dubi 犢(犊)鼻

On the anterior aspect of the knee, in the
depression lateral to the patellar ligament.

Note: When the knee is flexed, ST35 is lo-
cated in the depression lateral and inferior
to the patella.
                                                                                 patella

                                                                                patellar ligament




                                                                       ST35
64   Stomach Meridian

     ST36: Zusanli 足三里

     On the anterior aspect of the leg, on the
     line connecting ST35 with ST41, 3 B-cun
     inferior to ST35.

     Note: ST36 is located on the tibialis ante-
     rior muscle.

                                                          tibialis
                                                          anterior muscle




                                                   ST36
     ST37: Shangjuxu 上巨虛(虚)

     On the anterior aspect of the leg, on the
     line connecting ST35 with ST41, 6 B-cun
     inferior to ST35.

     Note: ST37 is located on the tibialis ante-
     rior muscle.

                                                          tibialis
                                                          anterior muscle




                                                   ST37
                                              WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   65


ST38: Tiaokou 條(条)口

On the anterior aspect of the leg, on the
line connecting ST35 with ST41, 8 B-cun
inferior to ST35.

Note: ST38 is located on the tibialis ante-
rior muscle, at the same level as St40.

                                                                    tibialis
                                                                    anterior muscle




                                                       ST38
ST39: Xiajuxu 下巨虛(虚)

On the anterior aspect of the leg, on the
line connecting ST35 with ST41, 9 B-cun
inferior to ST35.

Note: ST39 is located on the tibialis ante-
rior muscle, at the same level as GB35 and              tibialis
gB36.                                                   anterior muscle




                                                       ST39
66   Stomach Meridian

     ST40: Fenglong 豐(丰,豊)隆(隆)

     On the anterolateral aspect of the leg, lat-
     eral border of the tibialis anterior muscle,
     8 B-cun superior to the prominence of the
     lateral malleolus.

     Note: ST40 is one fingerbreadth (middle
     finger) lateral to ST38.                                                   tibialis
                                                                                anterior muscle
                                                                                one fingerbreadth
                                                                                (middle finger)




                                                                                lateral malleolus




                                                                         ST40
     ST41: Jiexi 解谿(溪)

     On the anterior aspect of the ankle, in the
     depression at the centre of the front surface       extensor
     of the ankle joint, between the tendons of          digitorum
                                                         longus
     extensor hallucis longus and extensor digi-         tendon                   medial
                                                                                  malleolus
     torum longus.
                                                     lateral malleolus            extensor hallucis
                                                                                  longus tendon
     Note: ST41 is located between two tendons
     on the dorsum of the foot which are more
     distinct when the ankle is in dorsiflexion,
     and is at the midpoint of the line connect-
     ing the prominences of the lateral malleo-
     lus and the medial malleolus.




                                                                         ST41
                                                     WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   67


ST42: Chongyang 衝(冲)陽(阳)

On the dorsum of the foot, at the joint of
the base of the second metatarsal bone and
the intermediate cuneiform bone, over the
dorsalis pedis artery.

                                                                           intermediate
                                                                           cuneiform bone
                                                                            dorsalis pedis
                                                                            artery

                                                                             second
                                                                             metatarsal
                                                                             bone




                                                              ST42
ST43: Xiangu 陷(陥)谷

On the dorsum of the foot, between the
second and third metatarsal bones, in the
depression proximal to the second metatar-
sophalangeal joint.


                                             third
                                             metatarsal                      second
                                             bone                            metatarsal
                                                                             bone




                                                                                second
                                                                                metatarso-
                                                                                phalangeal
                                                                                joint




                                                              ST43
68   Stomach Meridian

     ST44: Neiting 内庭

     On the dorsum of the foot, between the
     second and third toes, posterior to the web
     margin, at the border between the red and
     white flesh.




                                                        border between
                                                        red and white
                                                        flesh


                                                                         ST44
     ST45: Lidui 厲(厉)兌(兑)

     On the second toe, lateral to the distal
     phalanx, 0.1 f-cun proximal-lateral to the
     lateral corner of the second toenail, at the
     intersection of the vertical line of the lateral
     border and the horizontal line of the base of
     the second toenail.




                                                                         ST45
                  WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   69


SPLEEn MErIdIan
足太陰(阴)脾經(经,経)
70   Spleen Meridian

     SP1: Yinbai 隱(隐,隠)白

     On the great toe, medial to the distal pha-
     lanx, 0.1 f-cun proximal-medial to the me-
     dial corner of the toenail, at the intersection
     of the vertical line of the medial border and
     horizontal line of the base of the toenail.




                                                             SP1
     SP2: Dadu 大都(都)

     On the great toe, in the depression distal to
     the first metatarsophalangeal joint, at the
     border between the red and white flesh.




                                                                   border between
                                                                   red and white flesh
                                                       first
                                                       metatarsophalangeal
                                                       joint




                                                             SP2
                                                      WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   71


SP3: Taibai 太白

On the medial aspect of the foot, in the de-
pression proximal to the first metatarsopha-
langeal joint, at the border between the red
and white flesh.




                                                                          border between
                                                                          red and white flesh
                                                            first
                                                            metatarsophalangeal
                                                            joint




                                                                    SP3
SP4: Gongsun 公孫(孙)

On the medial aspect of the foot, antero-
inferior to the base of the first metatarsal
bone, at the border between the red and
white flesh.

Note: A depression can be felt when mov-
ing proximally from SP3. SP4 is located in
the depression distal to the base of the first   base of the
metatarsal bone.                                 first metatarsal
                                                 bone



                                                                          border between
                                                                          red and white flesh




                                                                    SP4
72   Spleen Meridian

     SP5: Shangqiu 商丘

     On the medial aspect of the foot, antero-
     inferior to the medial malleolus, in the
     depression midway between the tuberosity
     of the navicular bone and the prominence
     of the medial malleolus.
                                                          medial malleolus
     Note 1: SP5 is located at the intersection of
     two imaginary lines: the vertical line of the
     anterior border of the medial malleolus and
     the horizontal line of the inferior border of
     the medial malleolus.

     Note 2: SP5 is located posterior to LR4 and     navicular bone
     anterior to KI6.




                                                                 SP5
     SP6: Sanyinjiao 三陰(阴)交

     On the tibial aspect of the leg, posterior
     to the medial border of the tibia, 3 B-cun
     superior to the prominence of the medial
     malleolus.

     Note: 1 B-cun superior to KI8.



                                                                tibia




                                                     medial malleolus




                                                                 SP6
                                                WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   73


SP7: Lougu 漏谷

On the tibial aspect of the leg, posterior
to the medial border of the tibia, 6 B-cun
superior to the prominence of the medial
malleolus.

Note: 3 B-cun superior to SP6.




                                                          tibia




                                               medial malleolus




                                                              SP7
SP8: Diji 地機(机)

On the tibial aspect of the leg, posterior
to the medial border of the tibia, 3 B-cun          apex
                                                    of the
inferior to SP9.                                    patella

Note: SP8 is located at the junction of the
upper one third and lower two thirds of the
line connecting the apex of the patella with
the prominence of the medial malleolus.

                                                         tibia



                                                      medial
                                                      malleolus




                                                              SP8
74   Spleen Meridian

     SP9: Yinlingquan 陰(阴)陵泉

     On the tibial aspect of the leg, in the de-
     pression between the inferior border of the
     medial condyle of the tibia and the medial
     border of the tibia.                                                                 medial
                                                                                          condyle
                                                                                          of the tibia
     Note: A depression can be felt inferior to
     the knee joint when moving proximally
     along the medial border of the tibia. SP9 is
     located in a depression at the angle formed
     by the inferior border of the medial con-                         tibia
     dyle of the tibia and the posterior border of
     the tibia.




                                                                               SP9
     SP10: Xuehai 血海(海)

     On the anteromedial aspect of the thigh,
     on the bulge of the vastus medialis muscle,
     2 B-cun superior to the medial end of the
     base of the patella.




                                                     vastus medialis
                                                     muscle

                                                                                      medial end of the
                                                                                      base of the patella

                                                                               SP10
                                                          WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS    75


SP11: Jimen 箕門(门)

On the medial aspect of the thigh, at the
junction of the upper one third and lower
two thirds of the line connecting the medial
end of the base of the patella with SP12,
between the sartorius muscle and the ad-
ductor longus muscle, over the femoral
artery.
                                               femoral
                                               artery


                                               adductor
                                               longus
                                               muscle


                                                  sartorius
                                                  muscle


                                                                                medial end of the
                                                                                base of the patella

                                                                   SP11
SP12: Chongmen 衝(冲)門(门)

In the groin region, at the inguinal crease,
lateral to the femoral artery.

Note: At the same level as CV2, medial
and inferior to SP13.                             inguinal
                                                  crease


                                                                                    femoral
                                                                                    artery




                                                                   SP12
76   Spleen Meridian

     SP13: Fushe 府舍(舎)

     On the lower abdomen, 4.3 B-cun inferior
     to the centre of the umbilicus, 4 B-cun
     lateral to the anterior median line.




                                                SP13
     SP14: Fujie 腹結(结)

     On the lower abdomen, 1.3 B-cun inferior
     to the centre of the umbilicus, 4 B-cun
     lateral to the anterior median line.




                                                SP14
                                               WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   77


SP15: Daheng 大橫

On the upper abdomen, 4 B-cun lateral to
the centre of the umbilicus.

Note: At the same level and lateral to ST25,
KI16 and CV8.




                                                        SP15
SP16: Fuai 腹哀

On the upper abdomen, 3 B-cun superior to
the centre of the umbilicus, 4 B-cun lateral
to the anterior median line.

Note: 3 B-cun superior to SP15, at the
same level as CV11.




                                                        SP16
78   Spleen Meridian

     SP17: Shidou 食竇(窦)

     In the anterior thoracic region, in the fifth
     intercostal space, 6 B-cun lateral to the
     anterior median line.

     Note: SP17, ST18 and KI22 are located
     along the curve of the fifth intercostal
     space.




                                                      SP17
     SP18: Tianxi 天谿(溪)

     In the anterior thoracic region, in the fourth
     intercostal space, 6 B-cun lateral to the
     anterior median line.

     Note: SP18, ST17 and KI23 are located
     along the curve of the fourth intercostal
     space.




                                                      SP18
                                                WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   79


SP19: Xiongxiang 胸鄉(乡,郷)

In the anterior thoracic region, in the third
intercostal space, 6 B-cun lateral to the
anterior median line.

Note: SP19, ST6 and KI24 are located
along the curve of the third intercostal
space.




                                                         SP19
SP20: Zhourong 周榮(荣,栄)

In the anterior thoracic region, in the sec-
ond intercostal space, 6 B-cun lateral to the
anterior median line.

Note: SP20, ST15 and KI25 are located
along the curve of the second intercostal
space.




                                                         SP20
80   Spleen Meridian

     SP21: Dabao 大包(包)

     In the lateral thoracic region, in the sixth
     intercostal space, on the midaxillary line.

     Note: With the subject lying on the side
     and the arm abducted, SP21 is located at
     the intersection of the midaxillary line and
     the sixth intercostal space.


                                                    midaxillary
                                                    line




                                                                  SP21
                 WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   81


HEart MErIdIan
手少陰(阴)心經(经,経)
82   Heart Meridian

     HT1: Jiquan 極(极)泉

     In the axilla, in the centre of the axillary
     fossa, over the axillary artery.




                                                                                axillary
                                                                                fossa


                                                    axillary artery




                                                         HT1
     HT2: Qingling 靑(青)靈(灵,霊)

     On the medial aspect of the arm, just me-
     dial to the biceps brachii muscle, 3 B-cun
     superior to the cubital crease.

     Note: With the elbow flexed and the arm
     abducted, Ht2 is located at the junction of         cubital crease
     the upper two thirds and lower one third of             biceps brachii muscle
     the line connecting Ht1 with Ht3.




                                                         HT2
                                                       WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   83


HT3: Shaohai 少海(海)

On the anteromedial aspect of the elbow,
just anterior to the medial epicondyle of the
humerus, at the same level as the cubital
crease.

Note: With the elbow is flexed, HT3 is lo-
cated at the midpoint of the line connecting                        cubital crease
the medial end of the cubital crease and the
medial epicondyle of the humerus.


                                                           epicondyle of the
                                                           humerus




                                                                    HT3
HT4: Lingdao 靈(灵,霊)道(道)

On the anteromedial aspect of the forearm,
just radial to the flexor carpi ulnaris tendon,
1.5 B-cun proximal to the palmar wrist
crease.

Note 1: 1.5 B-cun proximal to HT7, at the
same level as the superior border of the
head of the ulna.
                                                                 ulna

Note 2: 1.5 B-cun proximal to the radial              flexor carpi
                                                      ulnaris tendon
side of the superior border of the pisiform
bone.                                             palmar wrist
                                                  crease

                                                                                     pisiform
                                                                                     bone




                                                                    HT4
84   Heart Meridian

     HT5: Tongli 通(通)里

     On the anteromedial aspect of the forearm,
     radial to the flexor carpi ulnaris tendon, 1
     B-cun proximal to the palmar wrist crease.

     Note 1: 1 B-cun proximal to HT7. HT 4
     is located at the level with the root of the
     head of the ulna, HT 5, the body of the
     head of the ulna and Ht 6, the base of the
     head of the ulna.                                               ulna
                                                          flexor carpi
                                                          ulnaris tendon
     Note 2: 1 B-cun proximal to the radial
     side of the proximal border of the pisiform      palmar wrist
                                                      crease
     bone.
                                                                                  pisiform
                                                                                  bone




                                                                            HT5
     HT6: Yinxi 陰(阴)郄

     On the anteromedial aspect of the forearm,
     radial to the flexor carpi ulnaris tendon, 0.5
     B-cun proximal to the palmar wrist crease.

     Note 1: 0.5 B-cun proximal to HT7, at the
     same level as the distal border of the head
     of the ulna.

     Note 2: 0.5 B-cun proximal to the radial                        ulna
     side of the proximal border of the pisiform          flexor carpi
                                                          ulnaris tendon
     bone.
                                                      palmar wrist
                                                      crease

                                                                                  pisiform
                                                                                  bone




                                                                            HT6
                                                      WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   85


HT7: Shenmen 神(神)門(门)

On the anteromedial aspect of the wrist,
radial to the flexor carpi ulnaris tendon, on
the palmar wrist crease.

Note: In the depression radial to the proxi-
mal border of the pisiform bone, on the
palmar wrist crease.

                                                               ulna
                                                    flexor carpi
                                                    ulnaris tendon

                                                palmar wrist
                                                crease

                                                                               pisiform
                                                                               bone




                                                                      HT7
HT8: Shaofu 少府

On the palm of the hand, in the depression
between the fourth and fifth metacarpal
bones, proximal to the fifth metacarpopha-
langeal joint.
                                                                            metacarpal
Note: Between the fourth and fifth metacar-                                 bone
pal bones, where the tip of the little finger
rests when a fist is made, at the same level
as PC8.
                                                                            fifth metacarpo-
                                                                            phalangeal joint




                                                                      HT8
86   Heart Meridian

     HT9: Shaochong 少衝(冲)

     On the little finger, radial to the distal
     phalanx, 0.1 f-cun proximal-lateral to the
     radial corner of the little fingernail, at the
     intersection of the vertical line of the radial
     border of the nail and horizontal line of the
     base of the little fingernail.




                                                       HT9
                           WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   87


SMaLL IntEStInE MErIdIan
手太陽(阳)小腸(肠)經(经,経)
88   Small Intestine Meridian

     SI1: Shaoze 少澤(泽,沢)

     On the little finger, ulnar to the distal
     phalanx, 0.1 f-cun proximal-medial to the
     ulnar corner of the little fingernail, at the
     intersection of the vertical line of ulnar
     border of the nail and horizontal line of the
     base of the little fingernail.




                                                                      SI1
     SI2: Qiangu 前谷

     On the little finger, in the depression distal
     to the ulnar side of the fifth metacarpopha-
     langeal joint, at the border between the red
     and white flesh.                                 palmar
                                                      metacarpophalangeal    fifth
                                                      crease                 metacarpophalangeal
     Note: When the hand is slightly flexed,                                 joint
     the point is located at the ulnar end of the
     palmar metacarpophalangeal crease of the
     little finger.




                                                                border between
                                                                red and white flesh




                                                                      SI2
                                                        WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS      89


SI3: Houxi 後(后)谿(溪)

On the dorsum of the hand, in the depres-
sion proximal to the ulnar side of the fifth
metacarpophalangeal joint, at the border
between the red and white flesh.
                                                                   fifth metacarpophalangeal joint
Note: When the hand is slightly flexed, the
point is located at the ulnar end of the dis-
tal transverse skin crease of the palm, at the
border between the red and white flesh.

                                                 border
                                                 between
                                                 red and
                                                 white flesh

                                                               distal transverse skin
                                                               crease of the palm




                                                                        SI3
SI4: Wangu 腕骨(骨)

On the posteromedial aspect of the wrist, in
the depression between the base of the fifth
metacarpal bone and the triquetrum bone,
at the border between the red and white
flesh.

Note: With one finger placed on SI3, push
and slide proximally along the fifth meta-
carpal bone to the bony projection, SI4 is                                               triquetrum
                                                                                         bone
located in the depression between these
two bones.

                                                                                        border
                                                                                        between
                                                               fifth metacarpal         red and
                                                               bone                     white flesh




                                                                        SI4
90   Small Intestine Meridian

     SI5: Yanggu 陽(阳)谷

     On the posteromedial aspect of the wrist, in
     the depression between the triquetrum bone
     and the ulnar styloid process.




                                                                    triquetrum bone        ulnar styloid
                                                                                           process




                                                                           SI5
     SI6: Yanglao 養(养)老

     On the posteromedial aspect of the fore-
     arm, in the depression radial to the head
     of the ulnar bone, 1 B-cun proximal to the
     dorsal wrist crease.

     Note: With the palm facing downwards,
     press the highest point of the head of ulnar
     bone with a finger, and then turn the palm
     towards the chest; SI6 is located at the cleft
     between the bones where the finger slides.                                  dorsal wrist
                                                                                 crease



                                                      head of the
                                                      ulnar bone




                                                                           SI6
                                                      WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   91


SI7: Zhizheng 支正

On the posteromedial aspect of the fore-
arm, between the medial border of the
ulnar bone and the flexor carpi ulnaris
muscle, 5 B-cun proximal to the dorsal
wrist crease.
                                                                     flexor carpi ulnaris
Note: 1 B-cun distal to the midpoint of the                          muscle
line connecting SI5 with SI8.

                                                                       ulna
                                                                         dorsal wrist
                                                                         crease




                                                                 SI7
SI8: Xiaohai 小海(海)

On the posteromedial aspect of the elbow,
in the depression between the olecranon
and the medial epicondyle of the humerus
bone.
                                                                           humerus bone
Note: When the elbow is slightly flexed,
SI 8 is located in the groove for the ulnar                                  olecranon
nerve.
                                              medial
                                              epicondyle
                                                                               groove for the
                                                                               ulnar nerve




                                                                 SI8
92   Small Intestine Meridian

     SI9: Jianzhen 肩貞(贞)

     On the shoulder girdle, posteroinferior to
     the shoulder joint, 1 B-cun superior to the
     posterior axillary fold.

     Note: When the arm is adducted, SI 9 is lo-
     cated 1 B-cun superior to the posterior axil-
     lary fold, posterior to the deltoid muscle.             deltoid muscle




                                                                     posterior
                                                                     axillary
                                                                     fold




                                                     SI9
     SI10: Naoshu 臑兪(俞)

     On the shoulder girdle, superior to the
     posterior axillary fold, in the depression
     inferior to the spine of the scapula.

                                                            spine of the
                                                            scapula




                                                                     posterior
                                                                     axillary
                                                                     fold




                                                     SI10
                                                      WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   93


SI11: Tianzong 天宗

In the scapular region, in the depression
between the upper one third and lower two
thirds of the line connecting the midpoint
of the spine of the scapula with the inferior
angle of the scapula.




                                                spine of the
                                                scapula               inferior angle
                                                                      of the scapula



                                                                   SI11
SI12: Bingfeng 秉風(风)

In the scapular region, in the supraspina-
tous fossa, superior to the midpoint of the
spine of the scapula.




                                                    spine of the
                                                    scapula



                                                                   SI12
94   Small Intestine Meridian

     SI13: Quyuan 曲垣

     In the scapular region, in the depression
     superior to the medial end of the spine of
     the scapula.

     Note: SI13 is located at the midpoint of the
     line connecting SI10 with the spinous pro-             spine of the
     cess of the second thoracic vertebra (T2).             scapula




                                                     SI13
     SI14: Jianwaishu 肩外兪(俞)

     In the upper back region, at the same level
     as the inferior border of the spinous process
     of the first thoracic vertebra (T1), 3 B-cun
     lateral to the posterior median line.

     Note 1: SI14 is located at the intersection
     of two imaginary lines: the vertical line
     of the medial extremity of the spine of the
     scapula and the horizontal line inferior to
     the spinous process of the first thoracic
     vertebra (T1).

     Note 2: SI14 is located at the same level as
     BL11, gV13, and the inferior border of the
     spinous process of the first thoracic verte-
     bra (T1).


                                                     SI14
                                                WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   95


SI15: Jianzhongshu 肩中兪(俞)

In the upper back region, at the same level
as the inferior border of the spinous pro-
cess of the seventh cervical vertebra (C7),
2 B-cun lateral to the posterior median line.

Note: SI15 is located at the intersection
of two imaginary lines: the vertical line of
the junction of the lateral one third and the
medial two thirds of the line connecting
the posterior median line with the medial
border of the scapula and the horizontal
line inferior to the spinous process of the
seventh cervical vertebra (C7).


                                                                   scapula




                                                          SI15
SI16: Tianchuang 天窗(窓)

In the anterior region of the neck, posterior
to the sternocleidomastoid muscle, at the
same level as the superior border of the
thyroid cartilage.

Note 1: The sternocleidomastoid muscle is
more distinct when the head is turned to the
opposite side against resistance.

Note 2: SI16 is located at the same level as
St9, LI18 and the superior border of the
thyroid cartilage. St9 is located anterior
to the sternocleidomastoid muscle, SI16,                             thyroid cartilage
posterior to the sternocleidomastoid muscle                         sternocleidomastoid
and LI18, midway between the anterior and                           muscle
posterior borders of the sternocleidomas-
toid muscle.

                                                          SI16
96   Small Intestine Meridian

     SI17: Tianrong 天容

     In the anterior region of the neck, posterior
     to the angle of the mandible, in the depres-
     sion anterior to the sternocleidomastoid
     muscle.

     Note: The sternocleidomastoid muscle is
     more distinct when the head is turned to the
     opposite side against resistance.




                                                                            angle of the
                                                                            mandible
                                                                        sternocleidomastoid
                                                                        muscle




                                                                 SI17
     SI18: Quanliao 顴(颧)髎(髎)

     On the face, inferior to the zygomatic bone,
     in the depression directly inferior to the
     outer canthus of the eye.




                                                     zygomatic
                                                     bone




                                                                 SI18
                                                           WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   97


SI19: Tinggong 聽(听,聴)宮(宫)

On the face, in the depression between the
anterior border of the centre of the tragus
and the posterior border of the condylar
process of the mandible.

Note: When the mouth is slightly opened,
SI19 is located in the depression anterior to
the centre of the tragus, between tE21 and
gB2.
                                                tragus




                                                  condylar process of the mandible




                                                                      SI19
                   WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   99


BLaddEr MErIdIan
足太陽(阳)膀胱經(经,経)
100   Bladder Meridian

      BL1: Jingming 睛(睛)明

      On the face, in the depression between the
      superomedial parts of the inner canthus of
      the eye and the medial wall of the orbit.

      Note: When the eye is closed, BL1 is lo-
      cated in the depression 0.1 B-cun superior
      and medial to the inner canthus of the eye.




                                                               BL1
      BL2: Cuanzhu 攢(攒,攅)竹

      On the head, in the depression at the medial
      end of the eyebrow.

      Note: A depression, the frontal notch, can
      often be palpated on the medial end of the
      eyebrow directly superior to BL1.              frontal
                                                     notch




                                                               BL2
                                                          WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   101


BL3: Meichong 眉衝(冲)

On the head, superior to the frontal notch,
0.5 B-cun superior to the anterior hairline.
Note: Midway between GV24 and BL4.



                                                frontal
                                                notch




                                                                    BL3
BL4: Qucha 曲差

On the head, 0.5 B-cun superior to the
anterior hairline, 1.5 B-cun lateral to the
anterior median line.

Note: At the junction of the medial one
third and lateral two thirds of the line con-
necting gV24 with St8.




                                                                    BL4
102   Bladder Meridian

      BL5: Wuchu 五處(处,処)

      On the head, 1 B-cun superior to the ante-
      rior hairline, 1.5 B-cun lateral to the ante-
      rior median line.

      Note: 0.5 B-cun superior to BL4, at the
      same level as gV23.




                                                      BL5
      BL6: Chengguang 承光

      On the head, 2.5 B-cun superior to the
      anterior hairline, 1.5 B-cun lateral to the
      anterior median line.

      Note: 1.5 B-cun superior to BL5. 2 B-cun
      superior to BL4




                                                      BL6
                                                WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   103


BL7: Tongtian 通(通)天

On the head, 4 B-cun superior to the ante-
rior hairline, 1.5 B-cun lateral to the ante-
rior median line.

Note: Midway between BL6 and BL8.




                                                          BL7
BL8: Luoque 絡(络)卻(却)

On the head, 5.5 B-cun superior to the
anterior hairline, 1.5 B-cun lateral to the
anterior median line.

Note: 0.5 B-cun posterior and 1.5 B-cun
lateral to gV20.




                                                          BL8
104   Bladder Meridian

      BL9: Yuzhen 玉枕

      On the head, at the same level as the
      superior border of the external occipital
      protuberance, and 1.3 B-cun lateral to the
      posterior median line.
                                                               external
      Note: BL9 is located at the intersection of              occipital
                                                               proturberance
      two imaginary lines: the vertical line of the
      lateral border of the trapezius muscle and             trapezius muscle
      the horizontal line of the superior border of
      the external occipital protuberance. at the
      same level as gV17.




                                                      BL9
      BL10: Tianzhu 天柱

      In the posterior region of the neck, at the
      same level as the superior border of the
      spinous process of the second cervical ver-
      tebra (C2), in the depression lateral to the
      trapezius muscle.

                                                             trapezius
                                                             muscle




                                                      BL10
                                                WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   105


BL11: Dazhu 大杼

In the upper back region, at the same level
as the inferior border of the spinous pro-
cess of the first thoracic vertebra (T1), 1.5
B-cun lateral to the posterior median line.




                                                         BL11
BL12: Fengmen 風(风)門(门)

In the upper back region, at the same level
as the inferior border of the spinous process
of the second thoracic vertebra (T2), 1.5 B-
cun lateral to the posterior median line.




                                                         BL12
106   Bladder Meridian

      BL13: Feishu 肺兪(俞)

      In the upper back region, at the same level
      as the inferior border of the spinous pro-
      cess of the third thoracic vertebra (T3), 1.5
      B-cun lateral to the posterior median line.




                                                      BL13
      BL14: Jueyinshu 厥陰(阴)兪(俞)

      In the upper back region, at the same level
      as the inferior border of the spinous process
      of the fourth thoracic vertebra (T4), 1.5 B-
      cun lateral to the posterior median line.




                                                      BL14
                                                WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   107


BL15: Xinshu 心兪(俞)

In the upper back region, at the same level
as the inferior border of the spinous pro-
cess of the fifth thoracic vertebra (T5), 1.5
B-cun lateral to the posterior median line.




                                                         BL15
BL16: Dushu 督兪(俞)

In the upper back region, level with the
inferior border of the spinous process of
the sixth thoracic vertebra (T6), 1.5 B-cun
lateral to the posterior median line.




                                                         BL16
108   Bladder Meridian

      BL17: Geshu 膈兪(俞)

      In the upper back region, at the same level
      as the inferior border of the spinous process
      of the seventh thoracic vertebra (T7), 1.5
      B-cun lateral to the posterior median line.

      Note: The inferior angle of the scapula is at
      the same level as the spinous process of the
      seventh thoracic vertebra.




                                                      BL17
      BL18: Ganshu 肝兪(俞)

      In the upper back region, at the same level
      as the inferior border of the spinous pro-
      cess of the ninth thoracic vertebra (T9), 1.5
      B-cun lateral to the posterior median line.




                                                      BL18
                                                WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   109


BL19: Danshu 膽兪(俞)

In the upper back region, at the same level
as the inferior border of the spinous process
of the tenth thoracic vertebra (T10), 1.5 B-
cun lateral to the posterior median line.




                                                         BL19
BL20: Pishu 脾兪(俞)

In the upper back region, at the same level
as the inferior border of the spinous pro-
cess of the 11th thoracic vertebra (T11), 1.5
B-cun lateral to the posterior median line.




                                                         BL20
110   Bladder Meridian

      BL21: Weishu 胃兪(俞)

      In the upper back region, at the same level
      as the inferior border of the spinous process
      of the 12th thoracic vertebra (T12), 1.5 B-
      cun lateral to the posterior median line.




                                                      BL21
      BL22: Sanjiaoshu 三焦兪(俞)

      In the lumbar region, at the same level as
      the inferior border of the spinous process
      of the first lumbar vertebra (L1), 1.5 B-cun
      lateral to the posterior median line.




                                                      BL22
                                               WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   111


BL23: Shenshu 腎兪(俞)

In the lumbar region, at the same level as
the inferior border of the spinous process
of the second lumbar vertebra (L2), 1.5 B-
cun lateral to the posterior median line.




                                                        BL23
BL24: Qihaishu 氣(气,気)海(海)兪(俞)

In the lumbar region, at the same level as
the inferior border of the spinous process
of the third lumbar vertebra (L3), 1.5 B-cun
lateral to the posterior median line.




                                                        BL24
112   Bladder Meridian

      BL25: Dachangshu 大腸兪(俞)

      In the lumbar region, at the same level as
      the inferior border of the spinous process
      of the fourth lumbar vertebra (L4), 1.5 B-
      cun lateral to the posterior median line.




                                                     BL25
      BL26: Guanyuanshu 關(关,関)元兪(俞)

      In the lumbar region, at the same level as
      the inferior border of the spinous process
      of the fifth lumbar vertebra (L5), 1.5 B-cun
      lateral to the posterior median line.




                                                     BL26
                                                         WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   113


BL27: Xiaochangshu 小腸(肠)兪(俞)

In the sacral region, at the same level as
the first posterior sacral foramen, and 1.5
B-cun lateral to the median sacral crest.

Note: At the same level as BL31.                 first posterior
                                                 sacral foramen




                                                                    BL27
BL28: Pangguangshu 膀胱兪(俞)

In the sacral region, at the same level as the
second posterior sacral foramen, and 1.5
B-cun lateral to the median sacral crest.

Note: At the same level as BL32.                 second posterior
                                                 sacral foramen




                                                                    BL28
114   Bladder Meridian

      BL29: Zhonglushu 中膂兪(俞)

      In the sacral region, at the same level as the
      third posterior sacral foramen, 1.5 B-cun
      lateral to the median sacral crest.

      Note: At the same level as BL33.                 third posterior
                                                       sacral foramen




                                                                          BL29
      BL30: Baihuanshu 白環(环)兪(俞)

      In the sacral region, at the same level as the
      fourth posterior sacral foramen, 1.5 B-cun
      lateral to the median sacral crest.

      Note: 1.5 B-cun lateral to the sacral hiatus,    fourth posterior
                                                       sacral foramen
      at the same level as BL34.




                                                                          BL30
                                                        WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   115


BL31: Shangliao 上髎(髎)

In the sacral region, in the first posterior
sacral foramen.

Note: The first posterior sacral foramen is
palpated in the depression, moving superi-
                                                first posterior
orly from BL32.                                 sacral foramen




                                                                   BL31
BL32: Ciliao 次髎(髎)

In the sacral region, in the second posterior
sacral foramen.

Note: The second posterior sacral foramen
is located in the depression, midway be-        second posterior
tween the posterior superior iliac spine and    sacral foramen

the spinous process of the second sacral
vertebra.                                                                            posterior
                                                                                     superior
                                                                                     iliac spine




                                                                   BL32
116   Bladder Meridian

      BL33: Zhongliao 中髎(髎)

      In the sacral region, in the third posterior
      sacral foramen.

      Note: The third posterior sacral foramen
      is located in the first depression, moving      third posterior
      downward from BL32.                             sacral foramen




                                                                         BL33
      BL34: Xialiao 下髎(髎)

      In the sacral region, in the fourth posterior
      sacral foramen.

      Note: The fourth posterior sacral foramen
      is located in the second depression, moving     fourth posterior
                                                      sacral foramen
      downward from BL32, at the same level as
      the sacral hiatus.




                                                                                sacral
                                                                                hiatus




                                                                         BL34
                                                WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   117


BL35: Huiyang 會(会)陽(阳)

In the buttock region, 0.5 B-cun lateral to
the extremity of the coccyx.

Note: The subject may be in prone position
or knee-chest position. BL35 is located at
the soft depression lateral to the extremity
of the coccyx.




                                                  coccyx




                                                           BL35
BL36: Chengfu 承扶

In the buttock region, at the midpoint of the
gluteal fold.




                                                           BL36
118   Bladder Meridian

      BL37: Yinmen 殷門(门)

      On the posterior aspect of the thigh, be-
      tween the biceps femoris and the semiten-
      dinosus muscles, 6 B-cun inferior to the
      gluteal fold.                                                                   gluteal
                                                                                      fold

      Note 1: In the prone position, the semiten-
                                                             biceps
      dinosus and the biceps femoris muscles                 femoris
      are more distinct when the knee is flexed              muscle
                                                      semitendinosus
      against resistance. In addition, it is easier   muscle
      to find the two muscles with internal and
      external rotation of the hip.

      Note 2: 1 B-cun superior to the midpoint of
      the line connecting BL36 with BL40.




                                                                       BL37
      BL38: Fuxi         (浮)郄

      On the posterior aspect of the knee, just
      medial to the biceps femoris tendon, 1 B-
      cun proximal to the popliteal crease.

      Note: With the knee in slight flexion, BL38
      is located medial to the biceps femoris ten-
      don, 1 B-cun proximal to BL39.




                                                                              biceps femoris
                                                                              tendon
                                                                              popliteal crease


                                                                       BL38
                                              WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS    119


BL39: Weiyang 委陽(阳)

On the posterolateral aspect of the knee,
just medial to the biceps femoris tendon in
the popliteal crease.

Note: The biceps femoris tendon is more
prominent when the knee is slightly flexed.




                                                                         biceps femoris
                                                                         tendon
                                                          popliteal crease


                                                       BL39
BL40: Weizhong 委中

On the posterior aspect of the knee, at the
midpoint of the popliteal crease.




                                                                         popliteal
                                                                         crease




                                                       BL40
120   Bladder Meridian

      BL41: Fufen 附分

      In the upper back region, at the same level
      as the inferior border of the spinous pro-
      cess of the second thoracic vertebra (T2), 3
      B-cun lateral to the posterior median line.

      Note: BL41 and BL12 are located at the
      same level as the inferior border of the
      spinous process of the second thoracic
      vertebra (T2).




                                                      BL41
      BL42: Pohu 魄户

      In the upper back region, at the same level
      as the inferior border of the spinous process
      of the third thoracic vertebra (T3), 3 B-cun
      lateral to the posterior median line.

      Note: BL42, BL13 and GV12 are located at
      the same level as the inferior border of the
      third thoracic vertebra (T3).




                                                      BL42
                                                WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   121


BL43: Gaohuang 膏肓

In the upper back region, at the same level
as the inferior border of the spinous pro-
cess of the fourth thoracic vertebra (T4), 3
B-cun lateral to the posterior median line.

Note: BL43 and BL14 are located at the
same level as the inferior border of the
spinous process of the fourth thoracic ver-
tebra (T4).




                                                         BL43
BL44: Shentang 神(神)堂

In the upper back region, at the same level
as the inferior border of the spinous process
of the fifth thoracic vertebra (T5), 3 B-cun
lateral to the posterior median line.

Note: BL44, BL15 and GV11 are located at
the same level as the inferior border of the
spinous process of the fifth thoracic verte-
bra (T5).




                                                         BL44
122   Bladder Meridian

      BL45: Yixi 譩譆

      In the upper back region, at the same level
      as the inferior border of the spinous process
      of the sixth thoracic vertebra (T6), 3 B-cun
      lateral to the posterior median line.

      Note: BL45, BL16 and GV10 are located
      at the same level as the inferior border of
      the spinous process of the sixth thoracic
      vertebra (T6).




                                                      BL45
      BL46: Geguan 膈關(关,関)

      In the upper back region, at the same level
      as the inferior border of the spinous pro-
      cess of the seventh thoracic vertebra (T7),
      3 B-cun lateral to the posterior median line.

      Note: BL 46, BL17 and GV9 are located
      at the same level as the inferior border of
      the spinous process of the seventh thoracic
      vertebra (T7).




                                                      BL46
                                                WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   123


BL 47: Hunmen 魂門(门)

In the upper back region, at the same level
as the inferior border of the spinous process
of the ninth thoracic vertebra (T9), 3 B-cun
lateral to the posterior median line.

Note: BL47, BL18 and GV8 are located
at the same level as the inferior border of
the spinous process of the ninth thoracic
vertebra (T9).




                                                         BL47
BL 48: Yanggang 陽(阳)綱(纲)

In the upper back region, at the same level
as the inferior border of the spinous pro-
cess of the tenth thoracic vertebra (T10), 3
B-cun lateral to the posterior median line.

Note: BL48, BL19 and GV7 are located
at the same level as the inferior border of
the spinous process of the tenth thoracic
vertebra (T10).




                                                         BL48
124   Bladder Meridian

      BL 49: Yishe 意舍(舎)

      In the upper back region, at the same level
      as the inferior border of the spinous process
      of the 11th thoracic vertebra (T11), 3 B-cun
      lateral to the posterior median line.

      Note: BL49, BL20 and GV6 are located at
      the same level as the inferior border of the
      spinous process of the 11th thoracic verte-
      bra (T11).




                                                      BL49
      BL 50: Weicang 胃倉(仓)

      In the upper back region, at the same level
      as the inferior border of the spinous pro-
      cess of the 12th thoracic vertebra (T12), 3
      B-cun lateral to the posterior median line.

      Note: BL50 and BL21 are located at the
      same level as the inferior border of the
      spinous process of the 12th thoracic verte-
      bra (T12).




                                                      BL50
                                               WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   125


BL51: Huangmen 肓門(门)

In the lumbar region, at the same level as
the inferior border of the spinous process
of the first lumbar vertebra (L1), 3 B-cun
lateral to the posterior median line.

Note: BL51, BL22 and GV5 are located at
the same level as the inferior border of the
spinous process of the first lumbar vertebra
(L1).




                                                        BL51
BL52: Zhishi 志室

In the lumbar region, at the same level as
the inferior border of the spinous process
of the second lumbar vertebra (L2), 3 B-
cun lateral to the posterior median line.

Note: BL52, BL23 and GV4 are located
at the same level as the inferior border of
the spinous process of the second lumbar
vertebra (L2).




                                                        BL52
126   Bladder Meridian

      BL53: Baohuang 胞(胞)肓

      In the buttock region, at the same level as
      the second posterior sacral foramen, 3 B-
      cun lateral to the median sacral crest.

      Note: BL53, BL28 and BL32 are located
      at the same level as the second posterior
      sacral foramen.




                                                                               second
                                                                               posterior
                                                                               sacral
                                                                               foramen




                                                                BL53
      BL54: Zhibian 秩邊(边,辺)

      In the buttock region, at the same level as
      the fourth posterior sacral foramen, 3 B-
      cun lateral to the median sacral crest.

      Note: 3 B-cun lateral to the sacral hiatus, at                   fourth posterior
                                                                       sacral foramen
      the same level as BL 30.



                                                       sacral
                                                       hiatus




                                                                BL54
                                                       WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   127


BL55: Heyang 合陽(阳)

On the posterior aspect of the leg, between
the lateral head and medial head of the
gastrocnemius muscle, 2 B-cun distal to the
popliteal crease.                               popliteal crease


Note: 2 B-cun distal to BL40, on the line      lateral head of the
connecting BL40 with BL57.                     gastrocnemius
                                               muscle

                                                  medial head
                                                  of the
                                                  gastrocnemius
                                                  muscle




                                                                     BL55
BL56: Chengjin 承筋

On the posterior aspect of the leg, between
the two muscle bellies of the gastrocne-
mius muscle, 5 B-cun distal to the popliteal
crease.

Note: Midway between BL55 and BL57.
                                                gastrocnemius
                                                muscle




                                                                     BL56
128   Bladder Meridian

      BL57: Chengshan 承山

      On the posterior aspect of the leg, at the
      connecting point of the calcaneal tendon
      with the two muscle bellies of the gastroc-
      nemius muscle.

      Note: With the leg stretched (plantar
      flexion) or the heel up, BL57 is located at   gastrocnemius
                                                    muscle
      the sharp angled depression inferior to the
      muscle belly of the gastrocnemius muscle.
      the two heads of the gastrocnemius muscle
      are separated to make a lambda shape (Λ).

                                                    calcaneal tendon




                                                                       BL57
      BL58: Feiyang 飛(飞)揚(扬)

      On the posterolateral aspect of the leg,
      between the inferior border of the lateral
      head of the gastrocnemius muscle and the
      calcaneal tendon, at the same level as 7 B-
      cun proximal to BL60.
                                                    gastrocnemius
      Note: BL58 is located 1 B-cun lateral and     muscle
      distal to BL57, proximal to BL60.




                                                    calcaneal tendon




                                                                       BL58
                                                       WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   129


BL59: Fuyang 跗陽(阳)

On the posterolateral aspect of the leg, be-
tween the fibula and the calcaneal tendon,
at the same level as 3 B-cun proximal to
BL60.




                                               calcaneal tendon
                                                                            fibula




                                                                  BL59
BL60: Kunlun 崑(昆)崙(侖,仑)

On the posterolateral aspect of the ankle,
in the depression between the prominence
of the lateral malleolus and the calcaneal
tendon.




                                                                         prominence of the
                                                                         lateral malleolus




                                                     calcaneal tendon




                                                                  BL60
130   Bladder Meridian

      BL61: Pucan (Pushen) 僕(仆)參(参)

      On the lateral aspect of the foot, distal to
      BL60, lateral to the calcaneus, at the border
      between the red and white flesh.




                                                      calcaneus                    border between
                                                                                   red and white flesh




                                                                          BL61
      BL62: Shenmai 申脈(脉)

      On the lateral aspect of the foot, directly
      inferior to the prominence of the lateral
      malleolus, in the depression between the
      inferior border of the lateral malleolus and
      the calcaneus.

      Note: BL62 is located in the depression
      distal to the inferior border of the lateral
                                                                                 prominence of the
      malleolus. the corresponding medial acu-                                   lateral malleolus
      puncture point to BL 62 is KI6.



                                                              calcaneus




                                                                          BL62
                                                          WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   131


BL63: Jinmen 金門(门)

On the dorsum of the foot, distal to the
anterior border of the lateral malleolus,
posterior to the tuberosity of the fifth meta-
tarsal bone, in the depression inferior to the
cuboid bone.




                                                                                cuboid bone




                                                                                  fifth metatarsal
                                                        tuberosity of the         bone
                                                        fifth metatarsal bone




                                                                       BL63
BL64: Jinggu 京骨(骨)

On the lateral aspect of the foot, distal to
the tuberosity of the fifth metatarsal bone,
at the border between the red and white
flesh.

Note: The tuberosity of the fifth metatarsal
bone is located approximately midway be-
tween the heel and the fifth metatarsopha-
langeal joint.



                                                 border between
                                                 red and white flesh    tuberosity of the
                                                                        fifth metatarsal bone




                                                                       BL64
132   Bladder Meridian

      BL65: Shugu 束骨(骨)

      On the lateral aspect of the foot, in the
      depression proximal to the fifth metatar-
      sophalangeal joint, at the border between
      the red and white flesh.




                                                            fifth
                                                            metatarsophalangeal
                                                            joint




                                                        border between
                                                        red and white flesh




                                                     BL65
      BL66: Zutonggu 足通(通)谷

      On the little toe, in the depression distal
      and lateral to the fifth metatarsophalangeal
      joint, at the border between the red and
      white flesh.



                                                        fifth
                                                        metatarsophalangeal
                                                        joint




                                                        border between
                                                        red and white flesh




                                                     BL66
                                                WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   133


BL67: Zhiyin 至陰(阴)

On the little toe, lateral to the distal pha-
lanx, 0.1 f-cun proximal to the lateral
corner of the toenail; at the intersection of
the vertical line of the lateral side of the
nail and the horizontal line of the base of
the toenail.




                                                         BL67
                   WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   135


KIDNEY MERIDIAN
足少陰(阴)腎(肾)經(经,経)
136   Kidney Meridian

      KI1: Yongquan 湧(涌)泉

      On the sole of the foot, in the deepest
      depression of the sole when the toes are
      flexed.

      Note: When the toes are flexed, KI1 is
      located approximately in the depression at
      the junction of the anterior one third and
      the posterior two thirds of the line connect-
      ing the heel with the web margin between
      the bases of the second and third toes.




                                                                          KI1
      KI2: Rangu 然谷

      On the medial aspect of the foot, inferior to
      the tuberosity of the navicular bone, at the
      border between the red and white flesh.




                                                      tuberosity of the         border between
                                                      navicular bone            red and white flesh




                                                                          KI2
                                                WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   137


KI3: Taixi 太谿(溪)

On the posteromedial aspect of the ankle,
in the depression between the prominence
of the medial malleolus and the calcaneal
tendon.

                                                         calcaneal tendon

                                                prominence of the
                                                medial malleolus




                                                            KI3
KI4: Dazhong 大鍾(钟)

On the medial aspect of the foot, postero-
inferior to the medial malleolus, superior
to the calcaneus, in the depression anterior
to the medial attachment of the calcaneal
tendon.
                                                        calcaneal tendon


                                               medial malleolus




                                                                  calcaneus




                                                            KI4
138   Kidney Meridian

      KI5: Shuiquan 水泉

      On the medial aspect of the foot, 1 B-cun
      inferior to KI3, in the depression anterior to
      the calcaneal tuberosity.




                                                              calcaneal tuberosity




                                                                     KI5
      KI6: Zhaohai 照海(海)

      On the medial aspect of the foot, 1 B-cun
      inferior to the prominence of the medial
      malleolus, in the depression inferior to the
      medial malleolus.

      Note: The corresponding lateral point to
      KI6 is BL62.
                                                       medial malleolus




                                                                     KI6
                                                     WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   139


KI7: Fuliu 復(复)溜

On the posteromedial aspect of the leg,
anterior to the calcaneal tendon, 2 B-cun
superior to the prominence of the medial
malleolus.

Note: At the same level and posterior to
KI8.




                                              medial malleolus


                                                                             calcaneal
                                                                             tendon




                                                                 KI7
KI8: Jiaoxin 交信

On the medial aspect of the leg, in the
depression posterior to the medial border
of the tibial bone, 2 B-cun superior to the
prominence of the medial malleolus.

Note: 0.5 B-cun anterior to KI7.


                                                             tibia




                                                 medial malleolus




                                                                 KI8
140   Kidney Meridian

      KI9: Zhubin 築(筑)賓(宾)

      On the posteromedial aspect of the leg, be-
      tween the soleus muscle and the calcaneal
      tendon, 5 B-cun superior to the prominence
      of the medial malleolus.

      Note 1: With the knee flexed and the leg
      stretched (plantar flexion) against resis-
      tance, the soleus muscle can be seen more         soleus muscle
      clearly along the medial border of the tibia               tibia
      bone.

      Note 2: At the same level as LR5, on the
      line connecting KI3 with KI10.
                                                      medial malleolus


                                                                                    calcaneal
                                                                                    tendon




                                                                         KI9
      KI10: Yingu 陰(阴)谷

      On the posteromedial aspect of the knee,
      just lateral to the semitendinosus tendon, in         semitendinosus tendon
      the popliteal crease.




                                                                         KI10
                                            WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   141


KI11: Henggu 橫骨(骨)

On the lower abdomen, 5 B-cun inferior
to the centre of the umbilicus, 0.5 B-cun
lateral to the anterior median line.




                                                      KI11
KI12: Dahe 大赫

On the lower abdomen, 4 B-cun inferior
to the centre of the umbilicus, 0.5 B-cun
lateral to the anterior median line.




                                                      KI12
142   Kidney Meridian

      KI13: Qixue 氣(气,気)穴

      On the lower abdomen, 3 B-cun inferior
      to the centre of the umbilicus, 0.5 B-cun
      lateral to the anterior median line.




                                                  KI13
      KI14: Siman 四滿(满,満)

      On the lower abdomen, 2 B-cun inferior
      to the centre of the umbilicus, 0.5 B-cun
      lateral to the anterior median line.




                                                  KI14
                                               WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   143


KI15: Zhongzhu 中注

On the lower abdomen, 1 B-cun inferior to
umbilicus, 0.5 B-cun lateral to the anterior
median line.




                                                         KI15
KI16: Huangshu 肓兪(俞)

On the upper abdomen, 0.5 B-cun lateral to
the centre of the umbilicus.




                                                         KI16
144   Kidney Meridian

      KI17: Shangqu 商曲

      On the upper abdomen, 2 B-cun superior
      to the centre of the umbilicus, 0.5 B-cun
      lateral to the anterior median line.




                                                  KI17
      KI18: Shiguan 石關(关,関)

      On the upper abdomen, 3 B-cun superior
      to the centre of the umbilicus, 0.5 B-cun
      lateral to the anterior median line.




                                                  KI18
                                            WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   145


KI19: Yindu 陰(阴)都(都)

On the upper abdomen, 4 B-cun superior
to the centre of the umbilicus, 0.5 B-cun
lateral to the anterior median line.




                                                      KI19
KI20: Futonggu 腹通(通)谷

On the upper abdomen, 5 B-cun superior
to the centre of the umbilicus, 0.5 B-cun
lateral to the anterior median line.




                                                      KI20
146   Kidney Meridian

      KI21: Youmen 幽門(门)

      On the upper abdomen, 6 B-cun superior
      to the centre of the umbilicus, 0.5 B-cun
      lateral to the anterior median line.




                                                      KI21
      KI22: Bulang 步(歩)廊

      In the anterior thoracic region, in the fifth
      intercostal space, 2 B-cun lateral to the
      anterior median line.




                                                      KI22
                                                 WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   147


KI23: Shenfeng 神(神)封

In the anterior thoracic region, in the fourth
intercostal space, 2 B-cun lateral to the
anterior median line.




                                                           KI23
KI24: Lingxu 靈(灵,霊)墟(墟)

In the anterior thoracic region, in the third
intercostal space, 2 B-cun lateral to the
anterior median line.




                                                           KI24
148   Kidney Meridian

      KI25: Shencang 神(神)藏(蔵)

      In the anterior thoracic region, in the sec-
      ond intercostal space, 2 B-cun lateral to the
      anterior median line.




                                                      KI25
      KI26: Yuzhong 彧中

      In the anterior thoracic region, in the first
      intercostal space, 2 B-cun lateral to the
      anterior median line.




                                                      KI26
                                                 WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   149


KI27: Shufu 兪(俞)府

In the anterior thoracic region, just inferior
to the clavicle, 2 B-cun lateral to the ante-
rior median line.




                                                           KI27
                       WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   151


PErICardIUM MErIdIan
手厥陰(阴)心包(包)經(经,経)
152   Pericardium Meridian

      PC1: Tianchi 天池

      In the anterior thoracic region, in the fourth
      intercostal space, 5 B-cun lateral to the
      anterior median line.




                                                                       PC1
      PC2: Tianquan 天泉

      On the anterior aspect of the arm, between
      the long head and short head of the biceps
      brachii muscle, 2 B-cun distal to the ante-
      rior axillary fold.
                                                       anterior
                                                       axillary fold




                                                                       biceps brachii muscle



                                                                       PC2
                                                        WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   153


PC3: Quze 曲澤(泽,沢)

On the anterior aspect of the elbow, at the
cubital crease, in the depression medial to
the biceps brachii tendon.
                                                biceps brachii tendon
Note: When the elbow is flexed at 45 de-                                        cubital crease
grees, PC3 is located medial to the biceps
brachii tendon.




                                                                     PC3
PC4: Ximen 郄門(门)

On the anterior aspect of the forearm,
between the tendons of the palmaris longus
and the flexor carpi radialis, 5 B-cun proxi-
mal to the palmar wrist crease.
                                                      flexor carpi
                                                      radialis tendon
Note 1: With the fist clenched, the wrist su-
pinated, and the elbow slightly flexed, the          palmaris
two tendons become more prominent. PC4               longus tendon

is located 1 B-cun distal to the midpoint of
the line connecting PC3 with PC7.
                                                  palmar wrist
                                                  crease
Note 2: If the palmaris longus tendon is not
present, PC4 is medial to the flexor carpi
radialis tendon.




                                                                     PC4
154   Pericardium Meridian

      PC5: Jianshi 間(间)使

      On the anterior aspect of the forearm,
      between the tendons of the palmaris longus
      and the flexor carpi radialis, 3 B-cun proxi-
      mal to the palmar wrist crease.
                                                          flexor carpi
      Note 1: With the fist clenched, the wrist           radialis tendon
      supinated and the elbow slightly flexed, the
                                                        palmaris
      two tendons become more prominent. PC5            longus tendon
      is located 3 B-cun proximal to PC7.

      Note 2: If the palmaris longus tendon is not    palmar wrist
                                                      crease
      present, PC5 is medial to the flexor carpi
      radialis tendon.




                                                                        PC5
      PC6: Neiguan 內關(关,関)

      On the anterior aspect of the forearm,
      between the tendons of the palmaris longus
      and the flexor carpi radialis, 2 B-cun proxi-
      mal to the palmar wrist crease.
                                                         flexor carpi
      Note 1: With the fist clenched, the wrist          radialis tendon

      supinated and the elbow slightly flexed,          palmaris
      the two tendons become more prominent.            longus tendon
      PC6 is located 2 B-cun proximal to PC7.
      the posterial point corresponding to PC6 is
      TE5.                                            palmar wrist
                                                      crease

      Note 2: If the palmaris longus tendon is not
      present, PC6 is medial to the flexor carpi
      radialis tendon.



                                                                        PC6
                                                        WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   155


PC7: Daling 大陵

On the anterior aspect of the wrist, between
the tendons of palmaris longus and the
flexor carpi radialis, on the palmar wrist
crease.
                                               flexor carpi
Note: With the fist clenched, the wrist        radialis tendon
slightly flexed, the two tendons become
                                               palmaris
more prominent. PC7 is located at the          longus tendon
midpoint of the palmar wrist crease, be-
tween the tendons of palmaris longus and
the flexor carpi radialis, at the same level
as Ht7, at the proximal extremity of the
pisiform bone.
                                                                    pisiform bone




                                                                  PC7
PC8: Laogong 勞(劳,労)宮(宫)

On the palm of the hand, in the depression
between the second and third metacarpal
bones, proximal to the metacarpophalan-
geal joints.

Remarks: Alternative location for PC8 -
On the palm of the hand, in the depression,
between the third and fourth metacarpal                                             metacarpal
bones, proximal to the metacarpophalan-                                             bone
geal joints.




                                                                          metacarpophalangeal
                                                                          joint


                                                                  PC8
156   Pericardium Meridian

      PC9: Zhongchong 中衝(冲)

      On the middle finger, at the centre of the tip
      of the middle finger.

      Remarks: Alternative location for PC9 -
      On the middle finger, 0.1 F-cun proximal to
      the radial corner of the middle fingernail,
      at the intersection of the vertical line of the
      radial side of the nail and the horizontal
      line of the base of the fingernail.




                                                        PC9
                            WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   157


TRIPLE ENERGIZER MERIDIAN
手少陽(阳)三焦經(经,経)
158   triple Energizer Meridian

      TE1: Guanchong 關(关,関)衝(冲)

      On the ring finger, ulnar to the distal
      phalanx, 0.1 f-cun proximal to the ulnar
      corner of the fingernail, at the intersection
      of the vertical line of the ulnar side of the
      nail and the horizontal line of the base of
      the fingernail.




                                                                              distal phalanx


                                                                            TE1
      TE2: Yemen 液門(门)

      On the dorsum of the hand, in the depres-
      sion superior to the web margin between
      the ring and little fingers, at the border
      between the red and white flesh.




                                                      border between
                                                      red and white flesh


                                                                            TE2
                                                            WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   159


TE3: Zhongzhu 中渚(渚)

On the dorsum of the hand, between the
fourth and fifth metacarpal bones, in the
depression proximal to the fourth metacar-
pophalangeal joint.




                                               metacarpal
                                               bone




                                                   metacarpophalangeal
                                                   joint

                                                                      TE3
TE4: Yangchi 陽(阳)池

On the posterior aspect of the wrist, in the
depression ulnar to the extensor digitorum                             extenser digitorum
                                                                       tendon
tendon, on the dorsal wrist crease.
                                                                            dorsal wrist crease
Note 1: TE4 can be palpated when moving
proximally along the gap between the fifth
and fourth metacarpal bones, at the same
level as LI5 and SI5.

Note 2: When the wrist is extended against
resistance, the extensor digitorum tendon
can be palpated more easily.




                                                                      TE4
160   triple Energizer Meridian

      TE5: Waiguan 外關(关,関)

      On the posterior aspect of the forearm,
      midpoint of the interosseous space between
      the radius and the ulna, 2 B-cun proximal
      to the dorsal wrist crease.

      Note: 2 B-cun proximal to TE4, in the
      depression between the radius and the ulna.
                                                                           ulna
      The anterior point corresponding to TE5 is
      PC6.                                                                 radius


                                                                                  dorsal wrist
                                                                                  crease


                                                      interosseous
                                                      space




                                                                     TE5
      TE6: Zhigou 支溝(沟)

      On the posterior aspect of the forearm,
      midpoint of the interosseous space between
      the radius and the ulna, 3 B-cun proximal
      to the dorsal wrist crease.

      Note: 1 B-cun proximal to TE5, between
      the radius and the ulna, at the same level as
      tE7.
                                                                            radius

                                                                              dorsal wrist
                                                                              crease
                                                              ulna




                                                                     TE6
                                                        WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS    161


TE7: Huizong 會(会)宗

On the posterior aspect of the forearm, just
radial to the ulna, 3 B-cun proximal to the
dorsal wrist crease.

Note: TE7 is ulnar to TE6.




                                                                            radius

                                                                              dorsal wrist
                                                                              crease
                                                             ulna




                                                                    TE7
TE8: Sanyangluo 三陽(阳)絡(络)

On the posterior aspect of the forearm,
                                               prominence
midpoint of the interosseous space between     of the
the radius and the ulna, 4 B-cun proximal      olecranon
to the dorsal wrist crease.

Note: At the junction of the upper two
thirds and lower one third of the line con-                                  interosseous
                                                                             space
necting tE4 with the tip of the elbow.

                                                                                radius

                                                                                     dorsal wrist
                                                                                     crease
                                                                ulna




                                                                    TE8
162   triple Energizer Meridian

      TE9: Sidu 四瀆(渎)

      On the posterior aspect of the forearm,
      midpoint of the interosseous space between     prominence
                                                     of the
      the radius and the ulna, 5 B-cun distal to     olecranon
      the prominence of the olecranon.


                                                                               interosseous
                                                                               space


                                                                                 radius



                                                                       ulna




                                                                         TE9
      TE10: Tianjing 天井

      On the posterior aspect of the elbow, in the
      depression 1 B-cun proximal to the promi-
      nence of the olecranon.

      Note: When the elbow is flexed, TE10 is
      located in the olecranon fossa.




                                                            olecranon fossa




                                                                        TE10
                                               WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   163


TE11: Qinglengyuan 淸(清)冷(令)淵(渊)

On the posterior aspect of the arm, on the
line connecting the prominence of ole-
cranon with the acromial angle, 2 B-cun
proximal to the prominence of the olecra-                         acromial angle
non.

Note: With the elbow extended, 2 B-cun
superior to the prominence of the olecra-
non.




                                                    olecranon




                                                         TE11
TE12: Xiaoluo 消濼(泺)

On the posterior aspect of the arm, on the
line connecting the prominence of the
olecranon with the acromial angle, 5 B-cun
proximal to the prominence of the olecra-                         acromial angle
non.




                                             prominence of the
                                             olecranon



                                                         TE12
164   triple Energizer Meridian

      TE13: Naohui 臑會(会)

      On the posterior aspect of the arm, postero-
      inferior to the border of the deltoid muscle,
      3 B-cun inferior to the acromial angle.                               deltoid muscle
                                                                                acromial angle




                                                                   TE13
      TE14: Jianliao 肩髎(髎)

      On the shoulder girdle, in the depression
      between the acromial angle and the greater
      tubercle of the humerus.                                                 acromial angle


      Note: When the elbow is flexed and the
      arm is abducted, two depressions appear         greater tubercle
                                                      of the humerus
      respectively anterior and posterior to the
      acromion. LI15 is located in the anterior
      one, deeper than the posterior one, in which
      tE14 is located.                                                   humerus




                                                            acromial angle




                                                                   TE14
                                                   WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   165


TE15: Tianliao 天髎(髎)

In the scapular region, in the depression su-
perior to the superior angle of the scapula.                        superior angle
                                                                    of the scapula
Note: With the upper limb hanging by the
                                                                        acromial angle
side of trunk in a seated position, TE15 is
located midway between gB21 and SI13.



                                                scapula




                                                            TE15
TE16: Tianyou 天牖

In the anterior region of the neck, at the
same level as the angle of the mandible,
in the depression posterior to the sterno-
cleidomastoid muscle.




                                                                           angle of the
                                                                           mandible
                                                                       sternocleidomastoid
                                                                       muscle




                                                            TE16
166   triple Energizer Meridian

      TE17: Yifeng 翳風(风)

      In the anterior region of the neck, posterior
      to the ear lobe, in the depression anterior to
      the inferior end of the mastoid process.




                                                       mastoid
                                                       process
                                                                           ear lobe




                                                                 TE17
      TE18: Chimai (Qimai) 瘈脈(脉)

      On the head, at the centre of the mastoid
      process, at the junction of the upper two                         auricular apex
      thirds and lower one third of the curved
      line from tE17 to tE20.




                                                                 TE18
                                              WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   167


TE19: Luxi 顱(颅)息

On the head, at the junction of the up-
per one third and lower two thirds of the
curved line from tE17 to tE20.




                                                       TE19
TE20: Jiaosun 角孫(孙)

On the head, just superior to the auricular
apex.                                                                  auricular apex


Note: With the auricle folded forward
and pressed against the head, the point is
located where the auricular apex touches
the head.




                                                       TE20
168   triple Energizer Meridian

      TE21: Ermen 耳門(门)

      On the face, in the depression between the
      supratragic notch and the condylar process
      of the mandible.
                                                        supratragic notch
      Note: When the mouth is slightly opened,
      tE21 is located in the depression anterior
      to the supratragic notch, directly superior
      to SI19.




                                                                      condylar process
                                                                      of the mandible



                                                                            TE21
      TE22: Erheliao 耳和髎(髎)

      On the head, posterior to the temple hair-
      line, anterior to the auricular root, posterior
                                                                      auricular root
      to the superficial temporal artery.                                                superficial
                                                                                         temporal artery




                                                                            TE22
                                                WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   169


TE23: Sizhukong 絲(丝)竹空

On the head, in the depression at the lateral
end of the eyebrow.

Note: TE23 is superior to GB1.




                                                         TE23
                       WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   171


gaLLBLaddEr MErIdIan
足少陽(阳)膽(胆)經(经,経)
172   gallbladder Meridian

      GB1: Tongziliao 瞳子髎(髎)

      On the head, in the depression, 0.5 B-cun
      lateral to the outer canthus of the eye.




                                                   GB1
      GB2: Tinghui 聽(听,聴)會(会)

      On the face, in the depression between the
      intertragic notch and the condylar process
      of the mandible.

      Note: When the mouth is opened, GB2 is
      located in the depression anterior to the
      intertragic notch.




                                                         condylar process
                                                         of the mandible




                                                   GB2
                                                 WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   173


GB3: Shangguan 上關(关,関)

On the head, in the depression superior to
the midpoint of the zygomatic arch

Note: In the depression superior to the
zygomatic arch, superior to St7.




                                             zygomatic arch




                                                              GB3
GB4: Hanyan 頷(颔)厭(厌)

On the head, at the junction of the upper
one fourth and lower three fourths of the
curved line from St8 to gB7.




                                                              GB4
174   gallbladder Meridian

      GB5: Xuanlu 懸(悬)顱(颅)

      On the head, at the midpoint of the curved
      line from St8 to gB7.




                                                   GB5
      GB6: Xuanli 懸(悬)釐(厘)

      On the head, at the junction of the upper
      three fourths and lower one fourth of the
      curved line from St8 to gB7.




                                                   GB6
                                                              WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   175


GB7: Qubin 曲鬢(鬓)

On the head, at the junction of the vertical
line of the posterior border of the temple
hairline and the horizontal line of the apex
of the auricle.                                   apex
                                                  of the
                                                  auricle




                                                                                             temple
                                                                                             hairline




                                                                        GB7
GB8: Shuaigu 率谷

On the head, directly superior to the auricu-
lar apex, 1.5 B-cun superior to the temporal
hairline.

Note: Superior to TE20, 1.5 B-cun within
the hairline, it is easier to palpate the point
while the subject is chewing.




                                                  auricular
                                                  apex




                                                                        GB8
176   gallbladder Meridian

      GB9: Tianchong 天衝(冲)

      On the head, directly superior to the pos-
      terior border of the auricular root, 2 B-cun
      superior to the hairline.

      Note: GB9 is 0.5 B-cun posterior to GB8.




                                                        auricular
                                                        root




                                                                       GB9
      GB10: Fubai            (浮)白

      On the head, posterosuperior to the mastoid
      process, at the junction of the upper one
      third and lower two thirds of the curved
      line from gB9 to gB12.

      Note: Posterior to the auricular apex, 1 B-
      cun superior to the hairline.




                                                     mastoid process




                                                                       GB10
                                                        WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   177


GB11: Touqiaoyin 頭(头)竅(窍)陰(阴)

On the head, posterior and superior to the
mastoid process, at the junction of the up-
per two thirds and lower one third of the
curved line from gB 9 to gB12.




                                              mastoid process




                                                                 GB11
GB12: Wangu 完骨(骨)

In the anterior region of the neck, in the
depression posteroinferior to the mastoid
process.




                                              mastoid process




                                                                 GB12
178   gallbladder Meridian

      GB13: Benshen 本神(神)

      On the head, 0.5 B-cun superior to the an-
      terior hairline, 3 B-cun lateral to the ante-
      rior median line.

      Note: GB13 is at the junction of the me-
      dial two thirds and lateral one third of the
      curved line from gV24 to St8.




                                                      GB13
      GB14: Yangbai 陽(阳)白

      On the head, 1 B-cun superior to the eye-
      brow, directly superior to the centre of the
      pupil.




                                                      GB14
                                                 WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   179


GB15: Toulinqi 頭(头)臨(临)泣

On the head, 0.5 B-cun within the anterior
hairline, directly superior to the centre of
the pupil.

Note: When looking straight ahead, GB15
is superior to the centre of the pupil, at the
midpoint of the curved line from gV24 to
St8.




                                                          GB15
GB16: Muchuang 目窗(窓)

On the head, 1.5 B-cun within the anterior
hairline, directly superior to the centre of
the pupil.

Note: GB16 is 1 B-cun superior to GB15.




                                                          GB16
180   gallbladder Meridian

      GB17: Zhengying 正營(营,営)

      On the head, 2.5 B-cun within the anterior
      hairline, directly superior to the centre of
      the pupil.

      Note: GB17 is 2 B-cun superior to GB15.




                                                     GB17
      GB18: Chengling 承靈(灵,霊)

      On the head, 4 B-cun within the anterior
      hairline, directly superior to the centre of
      the pupil.

      Note: GB18 is 1.5 B-cun posterior to
      gB17, at the same level as BL7.




                                                     GB18
                                               WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS       181


GB19: Naokong 腦(脑,脳)空

On the head, at the same level as the supe-
rior border of the external occipital protu-
berance, directly superior to gB20.

Note: GB19 is at the same level as GV17
and BL9.




                                                       external occipital
                                                       protuberance


                                                        GB19
GB20: Fengchi 風(风)池

In the anterior region of the neck, inferior
to the occipital bone, in the depression
between the origins of sternocleidomastoid
and the trapezius muscles.

Note: GB20 is at the same level as GV16.




                                                                             occipital bone

                                                                            sternoclei-
                                                                            domastoid
                                                                            muscle


                                                                     trapezius muscle


                                                        GB20
182   gallbladder Meridian

      GB21: Jianjing 肩井

      In the posterior region of the neck, at the
      midpoint of the line connecting the spinous
      process of the seventh cervical vertebra
      (C7) with the lateral end of the acromion.




                                                                           acromion




                                                                    GB21
      GB22: Yuanye 淵(渊)液

      In the lateral thoracic region, in the fourth
      intercostal space, on the midaxillary line.




                                                      midaxillary
                                                      line




                                                                    GB22
                                                      WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   183


GB23: Zhejin 輒(辄)筋

In the lateral thoracic region, in the fourth
intercostal space, 1 B-cun anterior to the
midaxillary line.




                                                midaxillary
                                                line




                                                               GB23
GB24: Riyue 日月

In the anterior thoracic region, in the sev-
enth intercostal space, 4 B-cun lateral to
the anterior median line.

Note 1: GB24 is inferior to the centre of
the nipple, one rib inferior to Lr14.
                                                                      midclavicular
Note 2: In females, GB24 can be found at                              line
the intersection of the midclavicular line
and the seventh intercostal space.




                                                               GB24
184   gallbladder Meridian

      GB25: Jingmen 京門(门)

      On the lateral abdomen, inferior to the free
      extremity of the 12th rib.

      Note: GB25 can be located while the sub-
      ject is lying on the side with the shoulder
      flexed. The free extremity of the 12th rib
      can be palpated below the inferior border
      of the costal arch posterior to the posterior
      axillary line.
                                                       posterior
                                                       axillary line




                                                                       GB25
      GB26: Daimai 帶(带,帯)脈(脉)

      On the lateral abdomen, inferior to the free
      extremity of the 11th rib, at the same level
      as the centre of umbilicus.

      Note 1: GB26 can be located by first locat-
      ing the tenth rib, then searching for the free
      extremity of the 11th rib that is situated
      immediately below the inferior border of
      the costal arch.

      Note 2: GB26 is inferior to LR13, at the
      same level as CV8.




                                                                       GB26
                                               WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   185


GB27: Wushu 五樞(枢)

On the lower abdomen, 3 B-cun inferior
to the centre of umbilicus, medial to the
anterior superior iliac spine.

Note: GB27 is 3 B-cun inferior to GB26, at
the same level as CV4.




                                                 anterior superior
                                                 iliac spine




                                                         GB27
GB28: Weidao 維(维)道(道)

On the lower abdomen, 0.5 B-cun medioin-
ferior to the anterior superior iliac spine.

Note: GB28 is 0.5 B-cun medioinferior to
gB27.                                             anterior superior
                                                  iliac spine




                                                         GB28
186   gallbladder Meridian

      GB29: Juliao 居髎(髎)

      In the buttock region, midpoint of the line
      connecting the anterior superior iliac spine
      and the prominence of the greater trochant-
      er.                                                                  anterior superior
                                                                           iliac spine




                                                      prominence of the
                                                      greater trochanter



                                                                        GB29
      GB30: Huantiao 環(环)跳

      In the buttock region, at the junction of the
      lateral one third and medial two thirds of
      the line connecting the prominence of the
      greater trochanter with the sacral hiatus.

      Note: GB30 is easier to locate when the           sacral hiatus
      subject is lying on the side with the thigh
      flexed.
                                                                                           prominence
                                                                                           of the
      Remarks: Alternative location for GB30 -                                             greater
      in the buttock region, at the junction of the                                        trochanter
      lateral one third and medial two thirds of
      the distance between the prominence of the                                    anterior superior
      greater trochanter and the anterior superior                                  iliac spine
      iliac spine.
                                                      prominence
                                                      of the greater
                                                      trochanter

                                                                        GB30
                                                  WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   187


GB31: Fengshi 風(风)市

On the lateral aspect of the thigh, in the
depression posterior to the iliotibial band
where the tip of the middle finger rests,
when standing up with the arms hanging
alongside the thigh.

Note: GB31 is located by first finding the
iliotibial band when the knee is slightly
flexed and the hip is abducted against resis-
tance.



                                                                      iliotibial
                                                                      band




                                                            GB31
GB32: Zhongdu 中瀆(渎)

On the lateral aspect of the thigh, posterior
to the iliotibial band, 7 B-cun superior to
the popliteal crease.




                                                                       iliotibial
                                                                       band


                                                popliteal
                                                crease



                                                            GB32
188   gallbladder Meridian

      GB33: Xiyangguan 膝陽(阳)關(关,関)

      On the lateral aspect of the knee, in the de-
      pression between the biceps femoris tendon
      and the iliotibial band, posterior and proxi-
      mal to the lateral epicondyle of the femur.




                                                                               iliotibial
                                                      biceps femoris           band
                                                      tendon
                                                                              lateral epicondyle
                                                                              of the femur



                                                                       GB33
      GB34: Yanglingquan 陽(阳)陵泉

      On the fibular aspect of the leg, in the
      depression anterior and distal to the head of
      the fibula.

                                                                              head of the
                                                                              fibula




                                                                       GB34
                                                            WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   189


GB35: Yangjiao 陽(阳)交

On the fibular aspect of the leg, posterior to
the fibula, 7 B-cun proximal to the promi-
                                                           popliteal
nence of the lateral malleolus.                            crease


Note: GB35 is located 1 B-cun distal to
the midpoint of the line connecting the
prominence of the lateral malleolus and the
lateral end of the popliteal crease, posterior
to gB36.

                                                                               fibula


                                                                                prominence of the
                                                                                lateral malleolus




                                                                       GB35
GB36: Waiqiu 外丘(邱)

On the fibular aspect of the leg, anterior to
the fibula, 7 B-cun proximal to the promi-       lateral end of the
nence of the lateral malleolus.                  popliteal crease


Note: GB36 is located 1 B-cun distal to
the midpoint of the line connecting the
prominence of the lateral malleolus and the
lateral end of the popliteal crease, anterior
to GB35.

                                                                              fibula


                                                                                prominence of the
                                                                                lateral malleolus




                                                                       GB36
190   gallbladder Meridian

      GB37: Guangming 光明

      On the fibular aspect of the leg, anterior to
      the fibula, 5 B-cun proximal to the promi-
      nence of the lateral malleolus.




                                                         fibula


                                                             prominence of the
                                                             lateral malleolus




                                                      GB37
      GB38: Yangfu 陽(阳)輔(辅)

      On the fibular aspect of the leg, anterior to
      the fibula, 4 B-cun proximal to the promi-
      nence of the lateral malleolus.




                                                         fibula


                                                             prominence of the
                                                             lateral malleolus




                                                      GB38
                                                        WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   191


GB39: Xuanzhong 懸(悬)鍾(钟)

On the fibular aspect of the leg, anterior to
the fibula, 3 B-cun proximal to the promi-
nence of the lateral malleolus.




                                                                         fibula


                                                                          prominence of the
                                                                          lateral malleolus




                                                                 GB39
GB40: Qiuxu 丘(坵)墟(墟)

On the anterolateral aspect of the ankle, in
the depression lateral to the extensor digi-    extensor
                                                digitorum
torum longus tendon, anterior and distal to     longus
                                                tendon
the lateral malleolus.
                                                lateral
                                                malleolus
Note: GB40 is easier to locate by finding
the extensor digitorum longus tendon when
the second to fifth toes are extended against
resistance.




                                                                 GB40
192   gallbladder Meridian

      GB41: Zulinqi 足臨(临)泣

      On the dorsum of the foot, distal to the
      junction of the bases of the fourth and fifth
      metatarsal bones, in the depression lat-
      eral to the fifth extensor digitorum longus       fifth
                                                        extensor
      tendon.                                           digitorum
                                                        longus
                                                        tendon


                                                                                 junction of the
                                                                                 bases of the
                                                      metatarsal                 4th and 5th
                                                      bone                       metatarsal
                                                                                 bones




                                                                          GB41
      GB42: Diwuhui 地五會(会)

      On the dorsum of the foot, between the
      fourth and fifth metatarsal bones, in the
      depression proximal to the fourth metatar-
      sophalangeal joint.




                                                          metatarsal
                                                          bone




                                                        4th
                                                        metatarsophalangeal
                                                        joint

                                                                          GB42
                                                    WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   193


GB43: Xiaxi 俠(侠)谿(溪)

On the dorsum of the foot, between the
fourth and fifth toes, proximal to the web
margin, at the border between the red and
white flesh.




                                                border
                                                between
                                                red and
                                                white flesh



                                                              GB43
GB44: Zuqiaoyin 足竅(窍)陰(阴)

On the fourth toe, lateral to the distal
phalanx, 0.1 f-cun proximal to the lateral
corner of the toenail, at the intersection of
the vertical line of the lateral side of the
nail and the horizontal line of the base of
the fourth toenail.




                                                              GB44
                 WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   195


LIVEr MErIdIan
足厥陰(阴)肝經(经,経)
196   Liver Meridian

      LR1: Dadun 大敦

      On the great toe, lateral to the distal pha-
      lanx, 0.1 f-cun proximal to the lateral
      corner of the toenail, at the intersection of
      the vertical line of the lateral side of the
      nail and the horizontal line of the base of
      the toenail.




                                                      LR1
      LR2: Xingjian 行間(间)

      On the dorsum of the foot, between the
      first and second toes, proximal to the web
      margin, at the border between the red and
      white flesh.




                                                            border
                                                            between
                                                            red and
                                                            white flesh




                                                      LR2
                                                      WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   197


LR3: Taichong 太衝(冲)

On the dorsum of the foot, between the first
and second metatarsal bones, in the de-
pression distal to the junction of the bases
of the two bones, over the dorsalis pedis
artery.
                                                                              dorsalis pedis
Note: LR3 can be felt in the depression                                       artery
when moving proximally from Lr2 in the
gap between the first and second metatarsal
bones towards the base of two metatarsal                                        metatarsal
                                                                                bone
bones.




                                                                   LR3
LR4: Zhongfeng 中封

On the anteromedial aspect of the ankle, in
the depression medial to the tibialis anteri-
or tendon, anterior to the medial malleolus.

Note: LR4 is located midway between SP5
and St41.

                                                tibialis anterior tendon




                                                           medial malleolus




                                                                   LR4
198   Liver Meridian

      LR5: Ligou 蠡溝(沟)

      On the anteromedial aspect of the leg, at
      the centre of the medial border (surface) of
      the tibia, 5 B-cun proximal to the promi-
      nence of the medial malleolus.
                                                     apex of the patella

      Note: LR5 is located at the same level as
      the upper two thirds and lower one third of
      the line connecting the apex of the patella
      with the prominence of the medial mal-
      leolus, at the centre of the medial border
      (surface) of the tibia, at the same level as
      KI9.                                                            tibia
                                                       prominence of the
                                                       medial malleolus




                                                                           LR5
      LR6: Zhongdu 中都(都)

      On the anteromedial aspect of the leg, at
      the centre of the medial border (surface) of
      the tibia, 7 B-cun proximal to the promi-
      nence of the medial malleolus.
                                                     apex of the patella

      Note: LR6 is located at 0.5 B-cun inferior
      to the midpoint of the line connecting the
      apex of the patella with the prominence of
      the medial malleolus, at the centre of the
      medial border (surface) of the tibia.

                                                                       tibia
                                                        prominence of the
                                                        medial malleolus




                                                                           LR6
                                                WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   199


LR7: Xiguan 膝關(关,関)

On the tibial aspect of the leg, inferior to
the medial condyle of the tibia, 1 B-cun
posterior to SP9.


                                               medial condyle
                                               of the tibia




                                                           LR7
LR8: Ququan 曲泉

On the medial aspect of the knee, in the
depression medial to the tendons of the
semitendinosus and the semimembranosus
muscles, at the medial end of the popliteal                      tendon of the
                                                                 semimembranosus
crease.                                                          muscle

                                                                        tendon of the
Note: With the knee flexed, LR8 is lo-                                  semitendinosus
cated in the depression medial to the most                              muscle

prominent tendon on the medial end of the                              popliteal
popliteal crease.                                                      crease




                                                           LR8
200   Liver Meridian

      LR9: Yinbao 陰(阴)包(包)

      On the medial aspect of the thigh, between
      the gracilis and the sartorius muscles, 4 B-
      cun proximal to the base of the patella.

      Note: With the hip slightly flexed and ab-
      ducted and with the muscle under tension,
      the sartorius muscle becomes more distinct.
      Lr 9 is located posterior to the sartorius
      muscle.                                                         sartorius
                                                                      muscle
                                                                      gracilis muscle    gracilis
                                                                                         muscle
                                                                      sartorius muscle




                                                                       patella




                                                                      LR9
      LR10: Zuwuli 足五里

      On the medial aspect of the thigh, 3 B-cun
      distal to St30, over the artery.


                                                     femoral artery




                                                                      LR10
                                                WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   201


LR11: Yinlian 陰(阴)廉

On the medial aspect of the thigh, 2 B-cun
distal to St30.

Note: LR11 is located lateral to the ad-
ductor longus muscle. When the thigh is
adducted against resistance with the hip
slightly flexed and abducted, the knee
flexed, the adductor longus muscle be-
comes more distinct.
                                                                       adductor
                                                                       longus
                                                                       muscle




                                                         LR11
LR12: Jimai 急脈(脉)

In the groin region, at the same level as the
superior border of the pubic symphysis,
and 2.5 B-cun lateral to the anterior median
line.



                                                                         pubic
                                                                         symphysis




                                                         LR12
202   Liver Meridian

      LR13: Zhangmen 章門(门)

      On the lateral abdomen, inferior to the free
      extremity of the 11th rib.

      Note: LR13 can be located while the sub-
      ject is lying on the side with the shoulder
      flexed. The free extremity of the 11th rib
      can be palpated below the inferior border
      of the costal arch.




                                                      LR13
      LR14: Qimen 期門(门)

      In the anterior thoracic region, in the sixth
      intercostal space, 4 B-cun lateral to the
      anterior median line.

      Note: LR14 is inferior to the centre of the
      nipple, 2 B-cun lateral to St19. In females,
      Lr14 is located at the intersection of the
      midclavicular line and the sixth intercostal
      space.




                                                      LR14
                  WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   203


gOVErnOr VESSEL
督脈(脉)
204   governor Vessel

      GV1: Changqiang 長(长)強

      In the perineal region, inferior to the coc-
      cyx, midway between the tip of the coccyx
      and the anus.

      Note: The subject may be in prone position
      or knee-chest position.




                                                       coccyx



                                                            anus




                                                                   GV1
      GV2: Yaoshu 腰兪(俞)

      In the sacral region, at the sacral hiatus, on
      the posterior median line.

      Note: The sacral hiatus is a small depres-
      sion immediately above the anal cleft.




                                                         sacral
                                                         hiatus




                                                                   GV2
                                                 WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   205


GV3: Yaoyangguan 腰陽(阳)關(关,関)

In the lumbar region, in the depression
inferior to the spinous process of the fourth
lumbar vertebra (L4), on the posterior
median line.

Note: GV3 can be located by first palpating
the highest points of the iliac crests and the
spinous process of the fourth lumbar verte-
bra (L4) can then be found at the midpoint
of the highest points of both iliac crests.                                    iliac
                                                                               crest




                                                           GV3
GV4: Mingmen 命門(门)

In the lumbar region, in the depression
inferior to the spinous process of the sec-
ond lumbar vertebra (L2), on the posterior
median line.




                                                           GV4
206   governor Vessel

      GV5: Xuanshu 懸(悬)樞(枢)

      In the lumbar region, in the depression
      inferior to the spinous process of the first
      lumbar vertebra (L1), on the posterior
      median line.




                                                     GV5
      GV6: Jizhong 脊中

      In the upper back region, in the depression
      inferior to the spinous process of the 11th
      thoracic vertebra (T11), on the posterior
      median line.




                                                     GV6
                                               WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   207


GV7: Zhongshu 中樞(枢)

In the upper back region, in the depression
inferior to the spinous process of the tenth
thoracic vertebra (T10), on the posterior
median line.




                                                         GV7
GV8: Jinsuo 筋縮(缩)

In the upper back region, in the depression
inferior to the spinous process of the ninth
thoracic vertebra (T9), on the posterior
median line.




                                                         GV8
208   governor Vessel

      GV9: Zhiyang 至陽(阳)

      In the upper back region, in the depression
      inferior to the spinous process of the sev-
      enth thoracic vertebra (T7), on the poste-
      rior median line.                                      inferior angle
                                                             of the scapula

      Note: The depression inferior to the
      spinous process of the seventh thoracic
      vertebra (T7) which is at the intersection of
      two imaginary lines: the posterior midline
      and the horizontal line of the inferior bor-
      der of the inferior angle of the scapula.




                                                      GV9
      GV10: Lingtai 靈(灵,霊)臺(台)

      In the upper back region, in the depression
      inferior to the spinous process of the sixth
      thoracic vertebra (T6), on the posterior
      median line.




                                                      GV10
                                               WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   209


GV11: Shendao 神(神)道(道)

In the upper back region, in the depression
inferior to the spinous process of the fifth
thoracic vertebra (T5), on the posterior
median line.




                                                        GV11
GV12: Shenzhu 身柱

In the upper back region, in the depression
inferior to the spinous process of the third
thoracic vertebra (T3), on the posterior
median line.                                                         spine of the
                                                                     scapula

Note: The depression inferior to the
spinous process of the third thoracic verte-
bra (T3) which is at the intersection of two
imaginary lines: the posterior median line
and the horizontal line of the medial end of
the spine of the scapula.




                                                        GV12
210   governor Vessel

      GV13: Taodao 陶道(道)

      In the upper back region, in the depression
      inferior to the spinous process of the first
      thoracic vertebra (T1), on the posterior
      median line.




                                                     GV13
      GV14: Dazhui 大椎

      In the posterior region of the neck, in the
      depression inferior to the spinous process
      of the seventh cervical vertebra (C7), on
      the posterior median line.

      Note 1: When the head is in a neutral
      position while the subject is seated, the
      most prominent site on the posterior aspect
      of the neck is the spinous process of the
      seventh cervical vertebra (C7). Forward
      flexion of the neck may facilitate palpation
      of the C7 spinous process.

      Note 2: Slight rotation of C7 can be pal-
      pated by rotating the head with the neck
      slightly flexed.


                                                     GV14
                                                           WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   211


GV15: Yamen 瘂(哑)門(门)

In the posterior region of the neck, in the
depression superior to the spinous process
of the second cervical vertebra (C2), on the
posterior median line.

Note: After locating GV16, GV15 is lo-
cated 0.5 B-cun inferior to GV16.




                                                spinous process
                                                of the second
                                                cervical vertebra
                                                (C2)



                                                                     GV15
GV16: Fengfu 風(风)府

In the posterior region of the neck, directly
inferior to the external occipital protuber-
ance, in the depression between the trape-
zius muscles.

Note: With the head slightly extended in
the seated position, loosen the trapezius           posterior hairline            trapezius
muscle, then move superiorly from the                                             muscle
midpoint of the posterior hairline to the oc-
cipital bone, gV16 will be found.
                                                 external
                                                 occipital
                                                 protuberance



                                                         trapezius
                                                         muscle



                                                                     GV16
212   governor Vessel

      GV17: Naohu 腦(脑,脳)戶

      On the head, in the depression superior to
      the external occipital protuberance.

      Note: GV17 is located in the depression at
      the intersection of two imaginary lines: the
      vertical line of the posterior median line            external
      and the horizontal line of the superior bor-          occipital
                                                            protuberance
      der of the external occipital protuberance,
      at the same level as BL9.




                                                     GV17
      GV18: Qiangjian 強間(间)

      On the head, 4 B-cun superior to the poste-
      rior hairline, on the posterior median line.

      Note: GV18 is located in the depression 1.5
      B-cun superior to gV17.

                                                            posterior
                                                            hairline




                                                     GV18
                                                 WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   213


GV19: Houding 後(后)頂(顶)

On the head, 5.5 B-cun superior to the pos-
terior hairline, on the posterior median line.

Note: GV19 is located 1.5 B-cun posterior
to gV20.


                                                                       posterior
                                                                       hairline




                                                          GV19
GV20: Baihui 百會(会)

On the head, 5 B-cun superior to the ante-
rior hairline, on the anterior median line.

Note 1: GV20 is located in the depression                                   auricular
1 B-cun anterior to the midpoint of the line                                apex
from the anterior hairline to the posterior
hairline.

Note 2: When the ears are folded, GV20 is
located at the midpoint of the connecting
line between the auricular apices.




                                                          GV20
214   governor Vessel

      GV21: Qianding 前頂(顶)

      On the head, 3.5 B-cun superior to the an-
      terior hairline, on the anterior median line.

      Note: GV21 is located at the midpoint of
      the line connecting gV20 and gV22.




                                                      GV21
      GV22: Xinhui 顖(囟)會(会)

      On the head, 2 B-cun superior to the ante-
      rior hairline, on the anterior median line.




                                                             anterior
                                                             hairline




                                                      GV22
                                                WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   215


GV23: Shangxing 上星

On the head, 1 B-cun superior to the ante-
rior hairline, on the anterior median line.




                                                                         anterior
                                                                         hairline




                                                         GV23
GV24: Shenting 神(神)庭

On the head, 0.5 B-cun superior to the an-
terior hairline, on the anterior median line.

Note: When the anterior hairline is unclear
or changed, GV 24 is located 3.5 B-cun su-
perior to the midpoint between the medial
ends of the eyebrows.




                                                                         anterior
                                                                         hairline




                                                         GV24
216   governor Vessel

      GV25: Suliao 素髎(髎)

      On the face, at the tip of the nose.




                                                                GV25
      GV26: Shuigou 水溝(沟)

      On the face, at the midpoint of the philtrum
      midline.

      Remarks: Alternative location for GV26 -
      at the junction of the upper one third and
      lower two thirds of the philtrum midline.




                                                     philtrum




                                                                GV26
                                                   WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   217


GV27: Duiduan 兌(兑)端

On the face, at the midpoint of the tubercle
of the upper lip.




                                                            GV27
GV28: Yinjiao 齦(龈)交

On the face, at the junction of the frenulum
of the upper lip with the upper gum.

Note: With the head extended in the seated                          frenulum of the
                                               upper gum            upper lip
posture and the upper lip lifted, gV28 is
located at the junction of the frenulum of
the upper lip with the upper gum.




                                                            GV28
                    WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   219


COnCEPtIOn VESSEL
任脈(脉)
220   Conception Vessel

      CV1: Huiyin 會(会)陰(阴)

      In the perineal region, at the midpoint of
      the line connecting the anus with the poste-
      rior border of the scrotum in males and the
      posterior commissure of labium majoris in
      females.

      Note: CV1 is located midway between the
      anus and the genital organ, with the subject   anus
      lying on the side or in knee-chest position.




                                                     anus




                                                            CV1
      CV2: Qugu 曲骨(骨)

      On the lower abdomen, superior to the pu-
      bic symphysis, on the anterior median line.




                                                                  pubic symphysis




                                                            CV2
                                               WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   221


CV3: Zhongji 中極(极)

On the lower abdomen, 4 B-cun inferior to
the centre of the umbilicus, on the anterior
median line.




                                                         CV3
CV4: Guanyuan 關(关,関)元

On the lower abdomen, 3 B-cun inferior to
the centre of the umbilicus, on the anterior
median line.




                                                         CV4
222   Conception Vessel

      CV5: Shimen 石門(门)

      On the lower abdomen, 2 B-cun inferior to
      the centre of the umbilicus, on the anterior
      median line.




                                                     CV5
      CV6: Qihai 氣(气,気)海(海)

      On the lower abdomen, 1.5 B-cun inferior
      to the centre of the umbilicus, on the ante-
      rior median line.




                                                     CV6
                                               WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   223


CV7: Yinjiao 陰(阴)交

On the lower abdomen, 1 B-cun inferior to
the centre of the umbilicus, on the anterior
median line.




                                                         CV7
CV8: Shenque 神(神)闕(阙)

On the upper abdomen, in the centre of the
umbilicus.




                                                         CV8
224   Conception Vessel

      CV9: Shuifen 水分

      On the upper abdomen, 1 B-cun superior to
      the centre of the umbilicus, on the anterior
      median line.




                                                     CV9
      CV10: Xiawan 下脘

      On the upper abdomen, 2 B-cun superior to
      the centre of the umbilicus, on the anterior
      median line.




                                                     CV10
                                               WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   225


CV11: Jianli 建里

On the upper abdomen, 3 B-cun superior to
the centre of the umbilicus, on the anterior
median line.




                                                        CV11
CV12: Zhongwan 中脘

On the upper abdomen, 4 B-cun superior to
the centre of the umbilicus, on the anterior
median line.
                                                                    xiphisternal
                                                                    junction
Note: CV12 is located at the midpoint of
the line connecting the xiphisternal junc-
tion and the centre of umbilicus.




                                                        CV12
226   Conception Vessel

      CV13: Shangwan 上脘

      On the upper abdomen, 5 B-cun superior to
      the centre of the umbilicus, on the anterior
      median line.




                                                     CV13
      CV14: Juque 巨闕(阙)

      On the upper abdomen, 6 B-cun superior to
      the centre of the umbilicus, on the anterior
      median line.




                                                     CV14
                                                WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   227


CV15: Jiuwei 鳩(鸠)尾

On the upper abdomen, 1 B-cun inferior
to the xiphisternal junction, on the anterior
median line.
                                                                    xiphisternal
                                                                    junction




                                                         CV15
CV16: Zhongting 中庭

In the anterior thoracic region, at the mid-
point of the xiphisternal junction, on the
anterior median line.




                                                                    xiphisternal
                                                                    junction




                                                         CV16
228   Conception Vessel

      CV17: Danzhong 膻中

      In the anterior thoracic region, at the same
      level as the fourth intercostal space, on the
      anterior median line.




                                                      CV17
      CV18: Yutang 玉堂

      In the anterior thoracic region, at the same
      level as the third intercostal space, on the
      anterior median line.




                                                      CV18
                                                WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   229


CV19: Zigong 紫宮(宫)

In the anterior thoracic region, at the same
level as the second intercostal space, on the
anterior median line.




                                                         CV19
CV20: Huagai 華(华)蓋(盖)

In the anterior thoracic region, at the same
level as the first intercostal space, on the
anterior median line.




                                                         CV20
230   Conception Vessel

      CV21: Xuanji 璇璣(玑)

      In the anterior thoracic region, 1 B-cun
      inferior to the suprasternal fossa, on the
      anterior median line.
                                                                        suprasternal
                                                                        fossa
      Note: CV21 is located 1 B-cun inferior to
      CV22.




                                                              CV21
      CV22: Tiantu 天突

      In the anterior region of the neck, in the
      centre of the suprasternal fossa, on the
      anterior median line.
                                                   clavicle
      Note: CV22 is located in the depression
      midway between the medial ends of each
      clavicle.
                                                                     suprasternal
                                                                     fossa




                                                              CV22
                                               WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   231


CV23: Lianquan 廉泉

In the anterior region of the neck, superior
to superior border to thyroid cartilage, in
the depression superior to the hyoid bone,
on the anterior median line.

Note: With the head slightly extended, the
hyoid tubercle can be palpated between the
                                                                            mandible
mandible and the thyroid cartilage.
                                                                        hyoid bone

                                                                       thyroid
                                                                       cartilage




                                                        CV23
CV24: Chengjiang 承漿(浆)

On the face, in the depression in the centre
of the mentolabial sulcus.




                                                                  mentolabial sulcus


                                                        CV24
                                                       WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   233




    rEfErEnCES



1. World Health Organization Regional Office for the Western Pacific,
    Standard acupuncture nomenclature, WPrO, Manila, Philippines, 1991
2. World Health Organization Regional Office for the Western Pacific,
    Standard acupuncture nomenclature, 2nd edition, WPrO, Manila, Philippines, 1993
3. World Health Organization Regional Office for the Western Pacific, WHO Interna-
    tional Standard Terminologies on Traditional Medicine in the Western Pacific Region,
    WPrO, Manila, Philippines, 2007
4. 作者未详,黃帝內經靈樞, 人民衛生出版社影印, 北京, 1956
5. 皇甫谧,针灸甲乙经,华夏出版社,北京,1996
6. 王懷隱等, 太平聖惠方, 人民衛生出版社影印, 北京, 1958
7. 王惟一,铜人腧穴针灸图经,华夏出版社,北京,1996
8. 作者未详,循经考穴编, 群联出版社影印, 上海, 1955
9. 中华人民共和国国家标准 经穴部位 (GB 12346-90), 标准出版社, 北京, 1990
10. The National Standard of the People’s Republic of China, Locations of Points, Stan-
    dards Press of China, Beijing, 1990
11. State Standard of the People’s Republic of China, THE LOCATION OF POINTS,
    foreign Languages Press, Beijing, 1990
12. 国家中医药管理局, 经穴部位文献与解剖-中华人民共和国国家标准 经穴部位的
    编制说明, 中国中医药出版社, 北京, 1990
13. 中国解剖学会体质调查委员会,中国人解剖学数值,人民卫生出版社,北京,2002
14. 王德深, 中国针灸穴位通鉴, 青岛出版社, 青岛, 2004
15. (第１次）日本経穴委員会, 標準経穴学, 医歯薬出版社, 東京, 1989
16. 松元四郎平, 孔穴類聚, 績文堂, 東京, 1927（1998年復刻）
17. 駒井一雄, 経絡経穴学, 績文堂, 東京, 1939（1976年復刻）
18. 本間祥白, 図解鍼灸実用経穴学, 医道の日本社, 横須賀, 1955 (1983年復刻)
19. 山下詢, 臨床経絡経穴図解, 医歯薬出版社, 東京, 1972
20. 竹之内診佐夫 濱添圀弘, 鍼灸医学, 南山堂, 東京, 1977（2003年復刻）
21. 森秀太郎, 解剖経穴図, 医道の日本社, 横須賀, 1984
234   references

      22. 形井秀一編, 山下詢著, カラーアトラス取穴法, 医歯薬出版社, 東京, 2000
      23. 崔容泰 李秀鎬, 精解鍼灸學, 杏林書院, 서울, 1974
      24. 崔容泰 外, 鍼灸學(上), 集文堂, 서울, 1988
      25. 安榮基, 鍼灸學叢書, 成輔社, 서울, 1991
      26. 全國韓醫科大學 經穴學敎室, 圖解經穴學, 正文閣, 서울, 2003
      27. Deadman P, Baker K, Al-khafaji M, A Manual of Acupuncture, Journal of Chinese
          Medicine Publication, California, 1998
      28. Drake RL, Vogl W, Mitchell AWM, Gray’s Anatomy for Students, Elsevier Churchill
          Livingstone, 2005
      29. Federative Committee on Anatomical Terminology (FCAT), International Anatomical
          terminology, george thieme Verlag, 1998
      30. Hecker HU et al,z Color Atlas of Acupuncture, Thieme, Stuttgart, 2001
      31. ISO/IEC directives, Part 2, rules for the structure and drafting of International Stan-
          dards, 2004
      32. Lotan a, acupoint Location guide, Etsem, Misgav, 2000
      33. Lumley J, Surface anatomy, 3rd Edition, Elsevier Churchill Livingstone, 2006
      34. Tixa S, Atlas of Palpatory Anatomy of Limbs and Trunk, Icon Learning Systems,
          new Jersey, 2003
                                             WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   235




annEX



                     ______ annEX 1 ______

     1St InfOrMaL COnSULtatIOn On dEVELOPMEnt Of
IntErnatIOnaL Standard Of aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS,
            In ManILa, PHILIPPInES, OCtOBEr 2003

                    TEMPORARY ADVISERS

      CHIna                      Professor Wang Xuetai
                                 Professor Huang Longxiang

      JAPAN                      Dr Yukio KUROSU
                                 Professor Tadashi YANO

      REPUBLIC OF KOREA          Professor Kang Sung-keel
                                 Professor Kim Yong-suk

                           OBSErVEr

      JaPan                      Professor Kiichiro tSUtanI

                    rESPOnSIBLE OffICErS

                       dr Choi Seung-hoon
              regional adviser in traditional Medicine
               WHO Western Pacific Regional Office
236   annex



                                        dr Chen Ken
                                      WR/South Pacific
                               WHO Western Pacific Regional Office

      Deliberation

      •   Identified the willingness of developing WHO standard of acupuncture point
          locations
      •   discussed country efforts made on standardization of acupuncture point locations
      •   discussed the classical documents
      •   discussed the standard measurements
      •   discussed description of standard point locations
                                                       WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   237



                               ______ annEX 2 ______

          2nd InfOrMaL COnSULtatIOn On dEVELOPMEnt Of
     IntErnatIOnaL Standard Of aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS,
                   In BEIJIng, CHIna, MarCH 2004

                              TEMPORARY ADVISERS

               CHIna                        Professor Wang Xuetai
                                            Professor Li ding
                                            Professor Huang Longxiang

               JaPan                        Professor Shuichi KataI
                                            Dr Kenji KOBAYASHI
                                            Dr Hisatsuku URAYAMA

               REPUBLIC OF KOREA            Professor Kang Sung-keel
                                            Professor Kim Yong-suk
                                            Professor Lee Hye-jung

                                     OBSErVErS

               CHINA                        Professor Jin Zhigao

               JaPan                        Professor Shoji SHInOHara

                              rESPOnSIBLE OffICEr

                                dr Choi Seung-hoon
                       regional adviser in traditional Medicine
                        WHO Western Pacific Regional Office

Deliberation

•   Confirmed the principles and methods for locating acupuncture points

       1. the body landmarks and surface remarks for locating acupuncture points
       2. the proportional measurements
       3. the methods for describing standard point locations
238   annex


                                    ______ annEX 3 ______

                   3rd InfOrMaL COnSULtatIOn On dEVELOPMEnt Of
              IntErnatIOnaL Standard Of aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS,
                            IN KYOTO, JAPAN, OCTOBER 2004

                                    TEMPORARY ADVISERS

                     CHIna                       Professor Wang Xuetai
                                                 Professor Huang Longxiang
                                                 Mrs Situ Wen

                     JaPan                       Professor Shuichi KataI
                                                 Dr Kenji KOBAYASHI
                                                 Dr Hisatsuku URAYAMA

                     REPUBLIC OF KOREA           Professor Kang Sung-keel
                                                 Professor Kim Yong-suk
                                                 Professor Lee Hye-jung

                     UnItEd KIngdOM              Professor nigel Wiseman

                                          OBSErVErS

                     JaPan                       Professor Shoji SHInOHara
                                                 Professor Shunji SaKagUCHI
                                                 Professor Yasuhiro KAWAHARA

                     REPUBLIC OF KOREA           Professor Yim Yun-kyoung

                                    rESPOnSIBLE OffICEr

                                      dr Choi Seung-hoon
                             regional adviser in traditional Medicine
                              WHO Western Pacific Regional Office

      Deliberation

      •   Identified 92 acupuncture points which have different locations among the Member
          States
      •   Started to review 92 controversial points
                                                        WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   239



                               ______ annEX 4 ______

          1St taSK fOrCE tEaM MEEtIng On dEVELOPMEnt Of
     IntErnatIOnaL Standard Of aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS,
                   IN BEIJING, CHINA, FEBRUARY 2005

                              TEMPORARY ADVISERS

               CHIna                        Professor Huang Longxiang

               JaPan                        Professor Shuichi KataI

               REPUBLIC OF KOREA            Professor Kim Yong-suk

                                     OBSErVErS

               CHIna                        Professor Wang Xuetai
                                            Professor Jin Zhigao

                               rESPOnSIBLE OffICEr

                                 dr Choi Seung-hoon
                        regional adviser in traditional Medicine
                         WHO Western Pacific Regional Office

Deliberation

•   Reviewed 12 controversial points out of 269 non-controversial points affirmed in
    Kyoto meeting
•   Confirmed 80 points out of formerly reviewed 92 controversial points
•   reviewed 18 points omitted in Kyoto meeting
•   reviewed 8 remaining controversial points
240   annex


                                   ______ ANNEX 5 ______

                   4tH InfOrMaL COnSULtatIOn On dEVELOPMEnt Of
              IntErnatIOnaL Standard Of aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS,
                      IN DAEJEON, REPUBLIC OF KOREA, APRIL 2005

                                  TEMPORARY ADVISERS

                    CHIna                      Professor Wang Xuetai
                                               Professor Huang Longxiang
                                               Professor Jin Zhigao
                                               Professor Wu Zhongchao

                    JaPan                      Professor Shuichi KataI
                                               Dr Kenji KOBAYASHI
                                               Professor Shoji SHInOHara
                                               Dr Hisatsuku URAYAMA

                    REPUBLIC OF KOREA          Professor Kang Sung-keel
                                               Professor Kim Yong-suk
                                               Professor Lee Hye-jung
                                               dr Koo Sung-tae

                                         OBSErVErS

                    CHINA                      Dr Tan Yuansheng

                    JAPAN                      Professor Yasuhiro KAWAHARA
                                               Professor Shunji SaKagUCHI
                                               dr Munenori SaItOH
                                               Mr toshimitsu KatOrI

                    REPUBLIC OF KOREA          Professor Yim Yun-kyoung
                                               Professor Park Hi-joon
                                               Professor Lee Sang-hoon
                                               Professor Song Ho-sub

                                  rESPOnSIBLE OffICEr

                                     dr Choi Seung-hoon
                            regional adviser in traditional Medicine
                             WHO Western Pacific Regional Office
                                                      WHO Standard aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS   241




Deliberation

•   reviewed the remaining controversial points with 24 points suggested by Chinese
    experts
•   discussed chart, text and model
242   annex


                                    ______ annEX 6 ______

                  2nd taSK fOrCE tEaM MEEtIng On dEVELOPMEnt Of
              IntErnatIOnaL Standard Of aCUPUnCtUrE POInt LOCatIOnS,
                            IN BEIJING, CHINA, AUGUST 2005

                                    TEMPORARY ADVISERS

                     CHIna                       Professor Huang Longxiang

                     JaPan                       Professor Shuichi KataI

                     REPUBLIC OF KOREA           Professor Kim Yong-suk

                                           OBSErVEr

                     CHIna                       Professor Wang Xuetai

                                    rESPOnSIBLE OffICEr

                                       dr Choi Seung-hoon
                             regional adviser in traditional Medicine
                              WHO Western Pacific Regional Office

      Deliberation

      •   reviewed the expressions of 269 non-controversial points
                                                      WHO STANDARD ACUPUNCTURE POINT LOCATIONS   243




                              ---ANNEX 7 - - -

          5TH INFORMAL CONSULTATION ON DEVELOPMENT OF
     INTERNATIONAL STANDARD OF ACUPUNCTURE POINT LOCATIONS,
                  IN OSAKA, JAPAN, SEPTEMBER 2005

                             TEMPORARY ADVISERS

               CHINA                      Professor Wang Xuetai
                                          Professor Huang Longxiang
                                          Professor Wu Zhongchao

               JAPAN                       Professor Shuichi KATAI
                                           Professor Shoji SHINOHARA
                                           Dr Hisatsuku URAYAMA

               REPUBLIC OF KOREA           Professor Kang Sung-keel
                                           Professor Kim Yong-suk
                                           Dr Koo Sung-tae

                                    OBSERVERS

               CHINA                       Dr Tan Yuansheng

               JAPAN                       Dr Kenji KOBAYASHI
                                           Professor Yasuhiro KAWAHARA
                                           Professor Shunji SAKAGUCHI
                                           Dr Munenori SAITOH
                                           Dr Kim Seong-joon

                              RESPONSIBLE OFFICER

                                 Dr Choi Seung-boon
                       Regional Adviser in Traditional Medicine
                        WHO Western Pacific Regional Office

Deliberation

•   Confirmed the expression of non-controversial points
•   Confirmed already reviewed controversial points
•   Reviewed and confirmed the pended 33 controversial points
•   Discussed chart, text and model
•   Discussed the principles of English translation
244   Annex                                                                                    r
                                                                                               I




      •   Decided the venue and the date of Regional Meeting in 2006
      •   Discussed the establishment of the International Society for the Acupuncture Point
          Locations and its tentative structure, objective and activities
                                                        WHO STANDARD ACUPUNCTURE POINT LOCATIONS   245




                               - - ANNEX8 - -

          6TH INFORMAL CONSULTATION ON DEVELOPMENT OF
     INTERNATIONAL STANDARD OF ACUPUNCTURE POINT LOCATIONS,
                    IN TOKYO, JAPAN, MARCH 2006

                              TEMPORARY ADVISERS

               CHINA                        Professor Wang Xuetai
                                            Professor Huang Longxiang
                                            Professor Zhao Jingsheng

               JAPAN                        Professor Shuichi KATAI
                                            Professor Shoji SHINOHARA
                                            Dr Hisatsuku URAYAMA

               REPUBLIC OF KOREA            Professor Kang Sung-keel
                                            Professor Kirn Yong-suk
                                            Dr Koo Sung-tae

                                     OBSERVERS

               CHINA                        Dr Wu Zhongchao

               JAPAN                        Dr Kenji KOBAYASHI
                                            Professor Yasuhiro KAWAHARA
                                            Professor Shunji SAKAGUCHI
                                            Dr Munenori SAITOH

                               RESPONSIBLE OFFICER

                                  Dr Choi Seung-boon
                        Regional Adviser in Traditional Medicine
                         WHO Western Pacific Regional Office

Deliberation

•   Reconfirmed the principles of acupuncture point locations
•   Finalized the expression of already confirmed acupuncture point locations
•   Reviewed and finalized 16 pended controversial points
•   Confirmed the principles of English translation
246   Annex



                                    --ANNEX9--

                   3RD TASK FORCE TEAM MEETING ON DEVELOPMENT OF
              INTERNATIONAL STANDARD OF ACUPUNCTURE POINT LOCATIONS,
                        IN DAEJEON, REPUBLIC OF KOREA, JUNE 2006


                                    TEMPORARY ADVISERS

                     CHINA                       Professor Huang Longxiang
                                                 Dr Tan Yuansheng

                     JAPAN                       Professor Shuichi KATAI
                                                 Professor Shoji SHINOHARA

                     REPUBLIC OF KOREA           Professor Kim Yong-suk
                                                 Dr Koo Sung-tae

                                    RESPONSIBLE OFFICER

                                      Dr Choi Seung-hoon
                             Regional Adviser in Traditional Medicine
                              WHO Western Pacific Regional Office

      Deliberation

      •   Reviewed the draft of the Regional Meeting in 2006
      •   Discussed the agenda for the Regional Meeting
      •   Reviewed chart, text and model
I   I
    I


    I
                                       WHO STANDARD ACUPUNCTURE POINT LOCATIONS   247




                    --ANNEX 1 0 - -

                 MEETING ON DEVELOPMENT OF
        WHO STANDARD ACUPUNCTURE POINT LOCATIONS,
         I'N TSUKUBA, JAPAN, OCTOBER/NOVEMBER 2006

                    TEMPORARY ADVISERS

        AUSTRALIA            Professor John McDonald

        CHINA                Professor Shen Zhixiang
                             Professor Huang Longxiang
                             Professor Wu Zhongchao
                             Professor Zhao Jingsheng

        JAPAN                Professor Shuichi KATAI
                             Professor Shoji SHINOHARA
                             Dr Hisatsuku URAYAMA
                             Professor Shunji SAKAGUCHI

        MONGOLIA             Dr Zina Sereenen

        REPUBLIC OF KOREA    Professor Kang Sung-keel
                             Professor Kim Yong-suk
                             Dr Koo Sung-tae
                             Professor Yim Yun-kyoung

        SINGAPORE            Professor Lee Tat Leang

        UNITED KINGDOM       Dr Val Hopwood

        UNITED STATES
        OF AMERICA           Professor Brenda Golianu
                             Dr Jeannie Kang

        VIETNAM              Professor Tai Thu Nguyen

        WFAS                 Professor Hu Weiguo
248   Annex




                                          OBSERVERS

                     JAPAN                      Dr Kenji KOBAYASHI
                                                Professor Yasuhiro KAWAHARA

                                                Dr Munenori SAITOH
                                                Mr Toshimitsu KATO RI

                     UNITED STATES
                     OF AMERICA                 Ms Marilyn Allen

                                   RESPONSIBLE OFFICER

                                      Dr Choi Seung-hoon
                             Regional Adviser in Traditional Medicine
                              WHO Western Pacific Regional Office

      Deliberation

      •   Reviewed six remaining controversial points
      •   Finalized a proposed WHO Standard Acupuncture Point Locations
      •   Drafted the note for record including recommendations
                                                      WHO STANDARD ACUPUNCTURE POINT LOCATIONS   249




                             ---ANNEX 1 1 - - -

           4TH TASK FORCE TEAM MEETING ON DEVELOPMENT OF
             WHO STANDARD ACUPUNCTURE POINT LOCATIONS,
               '-· IN MANILA, PHILIPPINES, JANUARY 2008

                              TEMPORARY ADVISERS

               CHINA                       Professor Huang Longxiang
                                           Dr Tan Yuansheng

               JAPAN                       Professor Shuichi KATAI
                                           Professor Shoji SHINOHARA

               REPUBLIC OF KOREA           Professor Yim Yun-kyoung
                                           Professor Lee Seung-deok

                                     OBSERVER

               JAPAN                       Professor Shunji SAKAGUCHI

                              RESPONSIBLE OFFICER

                                 Dr Choi Seung-hoon
                       Regional Adviser in Traditional Medicine
                        WHO Western Pacific Regional Office

Deliberation

•   Finalized the illustration of WHO Standard Acupuncture Point Locations
